

===== PAGE 1 =====
iScience
Article
Collective motion as a distinct behavioral state of
the individual
Daniel Knebel,
Ciona Sha-ked,
Noa Agmon, Gil
Ariel, Amir Ayali
ayali@tauex.tau.ac.il
Highlights
Locusts were monitored
before, during, and after
experiencing collective
motion
In each condition the
l o c u s t ss h o w e dd i s t i n c t
walking kinematics
This indicates that the
locusts adopt collective-
motion-dependent
behavioral states
Simulations show that
these states may be
advantageous for the
swarm integrity
Knebel et al., iScience24,
102299
April 23, 2021 ª 2021 The
Author(s).
https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.isci.2021.102299
ll
OPEN ACCESS

===== PAGE 2 =====
iScience
Article
Collective motion as a distinct
behavioral state of the individual
Daniel Knebel, 1,2 Ciona Sha-ked, 1 Noa Agmon, 2 Gil Ariel, 3 and Amir Ayali 1,4,5,*
SUMMARY
The collective motion of swarms depends on adaptations at the individual level.
We explored these and their effects on swarm formation and maintenance in lo-
custs. The walking kinematics of individual insects were monitored under labora-
tory settings, before, as well as during collective motion in a group, and again
after separation from the group. It was found that taking part in collective motion
induced in the individual unique behavioral kinematics, suggesting the existence
of a distinct behavioral mode that we term a ‘‘collective-motion-state.’’ This state,
characterized by behavioral adaptation to the social context, is long lasting, not
induced by crowding per se, but only by experiencing collective motion. Utilizing
computational models, we show that this adaptability increases the robustness of
the swarm. Overall, our ﬁndings suggest that collective motion is not only an
emergent property of the group but also depends on a behavioral mode, rooted
in endogenous mechanisms of the individual.
INTRODUCTION
The ability to form groups that move collectively is a key behavioral feature of many species ( Sumpter,
2006; Ward and Webster, 2016 ), assumed to increase the survival of both individuals and groups ( Be’er
and Ariel, 2019 ; Yang and Schmickl, 2019 ). Collectively moving organisms, however, differ in the levels of
peer-to-peer interactions, ranging from mini mal cooperation to complex social behaviors ( Attanasi et al.,
2014; Cavagna et al., 2010 ). Furthermore, endogenous differences among individuals, heterogenic envi-
ronments, and variability in the interactions between the individual and its direct environment are all
sources of variance that may affect the coordinated behavior of the collective. Accordingly, it is not clear
how synchronized collective motion constitutes such a robust phenomenon, maintaining its form across
various group sizes and densities, and under heterogeneous and unpredictable environmental
conditions.
One of the most interesting, albeit disastrous, examples of collective motion is that of the marching of lo-
custs. These insects swarm in groups of millions, migrating in mass across large distances, devastating
vegetation, and agriculture ( Ayali, 2019 ; Cullen et al., 2017 ; Zhang et al., 2019 ). In the context of social
interactions, locust swarming is characterized by a minimal level of cooperation between individuals:
collectivity, which is based on local interactions, is mostly manifested in alignment among neighboring in-
dividuals and in maintaining the overall movement in the same general direction (e.g., Ariel et al., 2014a ;
Bazazi et al., 2008 ). Nonetheless, the locust swarming phenomenon is extremely robust, with huge swarms
demonstrating moderate to high collectivity on huge scales (up to 6–7 orders of magnitudes), in terms of
both the number of animals and their spatiotemporal distribution ( Ellis and Ashall, 1957 ; Uvarov, 1977 ;s e e
further references in Ariel and Ayali, 2015 ). Thus, locusts exhibit a considerable disparity between little local
cooperation and large-scale collectivity.
What is the key to this ability of locust swarms to maintain their integrity? Here, we show by a
series of carefully controlled behavioral experiments that collective movement induces an internal
switch in the individual gregarious locust, activating a behavioral mode we refer to as a ‘‘collective-
motion-state.’’ In this state, the kinematic behavio r of individuals notably differs from that during a
non-collective-motion-state. It is important to emphasize that both the ‘‘collective-motion-state’’ and
the ‘‘non-collective-motion-state’’ are internal states of swarming-gregarious locusts. We are not
referring to the well-known solitarious-gregarious phase transition in locusts ( Ayali, 2019 ; Cullen et al.,
2017).
1School of Zoology, Faculty of
Life Sciences, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, 6997801,
Israel
2Department of Computer
Science, Bar-Ilan University,
Ramat-Gan, 5290002, Israel
3Department of
Mathematics, Bar Ilan
University, Ramat-Gan,
5290002, Israel
4Sagol School of
Neuroscience, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, 6997801,
Israel
5Lead contact
*Correspondence:
ayali@tauex.tau.ac.il
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.
2021.102299
iScience 24, 102299, April 23, 2021ª 2021 The Author(s).
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1
ll
OPEN ACCESS

===== PAGE 3 =====
How, then, does the collective-motion-state affect the formation and robustness of the swarm? Interest-
ingly, the switch into this state seems to occur rapidly, and in response to coordinated walking. In particular,
our experiments indicate that aggregation alone is not sufﬁcient. Switching out of the collective-motion-
state occurs over a longer timescale— signiﬁcantly longer than the typical timescale of normal ﬂuctuations
around the swarm typical dynamics. Hence, stocha stic ﬂuctuations, typical to swarming behavior ( Algar
et al., 2019 ; Ariel and Ayali, 2015 ; Escaff et al., 2018 ), are ‘‘smoothed-out,’’ leading to highly robust
dynamics of the swarm collective behavior, which is in turn beneﬁcial for the swarm integrity.
Using a simpliﬁed computer model, we simulated the swarming properties of locust-like agents with
different kinematic parameters, representing the different behavioral states. The results support the func-
tional advantages of the collective-motion-state, allowing us to conclude that the collective-motion-state
provides an individual-based mechanism that increases the stability of swarms in the presence of ﬂuctua-
tions, preventing the swarm from collapsing.
RESULTS
The main objective of this report was to examine the behavior of individual animals upon joining and mostly
leaving a group of conspeciﬁcs. Here we studied gregarious locusts, reared in dense populations, one
developmental stage before becoming adults and developing functional wings (i.e., ﬁfth-instar larva).
The experiments comprised three consecutive stages, representing different conditions ( Figure 1 and
Video S1 ): (1) Isolation stage: a single animal was taken from its highly dense rearing cage, tagged with
a barcode, and introduced alone into a ring-shap ed arena (outer and inner diameters: 60 and 30 cm,
respectively). (2) Grouping stage: nine other individually tagged animals were added to the arena. (3)
Re-isolation stage: the nine added animals were removed from the arena, leaving the original animal alone.
The duration of each stage was 1 h, which was enough for the locusts to exhibit their walking kinematics, yet
did not cause behavioral changes due to exhaustion, hunger, etc. The trajectories of the animals were fully
reconstructed using a barcode tracking system. The m iddle 40 min of each stage were analyzed, as detailed
in the transparent methods section. A range of kinematic statistics was collected to classify and compare
the locusts’ behavior in the different stages.
Swarm formation—validation of collective motion
To verify that our grouping conditions were indeed inducing collective motion (swarming), we calculated
the synchronization in movement of the grouped animals using the order parameter (see transparent
methods for deﬁnition), which is a fundamental estimator for the typical marching behavior of locusts
(e.g., Knebel et al., 2019 ). The median order parameter in the grouping stage was found to be signiﬁcantly
higher than that obtained for computationally rand omized groups (as presented in our previous report,
Knebel et al., 2019 ; medians: 0.632 and 0.239, respective ly; Wilcoxon rank-sum test: p < 0.001).
Figure 1. A schematic ﬂow of t he experimental procedure
Locusts were reared in high-density conditions. The Experiments comprised the following consecutive stages: (1) isolation for 1 h in the arena, (2) g rouping
for 1 h, and (3) re-isolation for 1 h.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
2 iScience 24, 102299, April 23, 2021
iScience
Article

===== PAGE 4 =====
Consequently, we conclude that the groups in our experimental setup indeed demonstrated swarming and
collective motion.
Kinematic differences among the isolation, grouping, and re-isolation stages
Locusts walk in an intermittent motion pattern ( Ariel et al., 2014a ; Bazazi et al., 2012 ), i.e., movement occurs
in sequences of alternating walking bouts and pauses. To characterize individual locust kinematics, we
measured four parameters: (1) the fraction of time an animal spends walking, (2) the average speed while
walking, (3) the average walking bout duration, and (4) the average pause duration. Comparing these
values across the three experimental stages, we found several statistically signiﬁcant differences ( Figure 2 ).
In the following, p values correspond to a Friedman te st followed by a multiple comparison test using the
Bonferroni method.
We found that when comparing between isolation and grouping, the fraction of time spent walking and the
pause durations differed signiﬁcantly (p < 0.01 and p < 0. 001, respectively), showing a larger fraction of time
walking and shorter pauses while grouping. These ﬁndings are in accordance with previous reports ( Knebel
et al., 2019 ), and are consistent with the known propensity of locusts to walk more and rest for shorter times
w h i l ei nas w a r m(Ariel et al., 2014a ; Bazazi et al, 2008 , 2012; Knebel et al., 2019 ). However, our experiments
also revealed a new effect of swarming. Comparing the isolation and re-isolation stages, we found that all
the studied parameters differed signiﬁcantly. Speciﬁc ally, the fraction of time walking, speed, and walking
bout duration were all higher in the re-isolation st age, whereas the pause duration decreased (p < 0.001,
p < 0.001, p < 0.05, and p < 0.05, respectively). Interpre ting these parameters tog ether, while also taking
Figure 2. Kinematic changes throughou t the three experimental conditions
(A–D) (A) The fraction of walking, (B) the averaged walking speed, (C) the average duration of walking bouts, and (D) the
average duration of pauses of the traced animals in the isolati on, grouping, and re-isolation stages. Red lines denote the
median. Boxes show the interquartile range (25th to 75th percentiles). Whiskers are the max and min data points
(excluding points that are more than 1.5 times the interquartile range away from the bottom or top of the box). *p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102299, April 23, 2021 3
iScience
Article

===== PAGE 5 =====
into account the low propensity of locusts to turn whil e walking (or to make a U-turn upon starting to walk;
Ariel et al., 2014a ), the overall area explored by the locusts was much larger during the second isolation
state. Furthermore, comparing the grouping and re-isolation conditions revealed that the walking bout
duration increased signiﬁcantly following re-isolation (p < 0.01). The data for all other comparison combi-
nations were found not to differ signiﬁcantly. The exact data points and trends can be found in Figure S1 .
The increase in activity following re-isolation is surprising and suggests that the marching behavior of
locusts is not dictated by instantaneous or immediate interactions among individuals per se. Rather, our
ﬁndings indicate that the interactions with other marching locusts induce a switch to a new internal behav-
ioral state, which outlasts the presence of the swarm. In accordance with our results, we term this internal
state the ‘‘collective-motion-state.’’ The different behavioral states are schematically presented in Figure 3 .
To verify that the observed behavioral changes indeed represent a transient state, rather than a permanent
behavioral modulation, a simple control experiment was performed. In six of the experiments, following
the re-isolation stage, locusts were returned to their rearing cage (in high crowding conditions without col-
lective motion) and tested the next day again alone in the arena (isolation condition). We found no signif-
icant behavioral difference between this latter isolation and the ﬁrst isolation stage of the previous day.
Hence the collective-motion state is transient. A second series of control experiments (n = 6) was per-
formed to exclude potential time effects on the locusts’ behavior due to the duration of the experiments.
To this end, locusts were tested in isolation for three consecutive hours. The above-described kinematic
analysis procedure was then performed separately on three 40-min segments of the 3-h tests, and no
signiﬁcant differences were found.
Consistency of individual behavioral tendencies
Despite the observed major differences in behavioral kinematics among the three experimental stages, we
were also interested to know whether there are any correlations between the changing parameters in the
three experimental conditions: isolation, grouping, and re-isolation. This would indicate that although in-
dividuals change their behavior throughout the experimental stages ( Figure 2 ), they maintain the relative
position when compared with others, and thus show some consistent individual tendencies. We found that
individual behavioral tendencies generally persisted. The fraction of walking, speed, and pause durations
all showed high within-individual correlation across the three stages. The walking bout durations, however,
were signiﬁcantly correlated only between the isolation and grouped stages, but not between re-isolation
and the other stages (see Table 1 for numerical details). This suggests that whereas the fraction of walking,
speed, and pause durations are highly dependent on the animal tested itself, the bout duration during re-
isolation cannot be predicted by the previous stages, and is therefore inﬂuenced by the social context
rather than by the animal’s unique properties.
Modeling and simulations
The above-described experiments demonstrated that individual locusts introduced into a collectively mov-
ing swarm undergo a switch into a distinct internal sociobehavioral state. However, whether this change
confers a beneﬁt on the swarm formation and maintenance, and if so, of what kind, remained unanswered.
Figure 3. A schematic representation o f the behavioral states of the locusts
ll
OPEN ACCESS
4 iScience 24, 102299, April 23, 2021
iScience
Article

===== PAGE 6 =====
To explore this aspect of the collective-motion-state, we developed a model that simulates locust swarms,
in which individual kinematics could be manipulated.
To simulate swarms, we used a simpli ﬁed agent-based model in a square domain with periodic boundaries.
Agents were designed as rectangles with a circular receptive ﬁeld around their center. The agents’ kine-
matics was programmed to resemble that of locusts, i.e., to move in an intermittent motion (pause-and-
go) pattern: at every step of the simulation, each agent made an individual decision whether to walk or
stop, based on its current state (walking or stopping) with predeﬁned probabilities ( p
W and pS,r e s p e c t i v e l y ;
Figure S2 ). While moving, the speed was constant. The individual direction of movement was allowed to
change only when an agent changes its state from stopping to walking ( Ariel et al., 2014a ). An agent’s
new direction was a weighted sum of its own direction (inertia), the direction of other agents in its visual
ﬁeld, with a short memory (see Rimer and Ariel, 2017 for the importance of memory in pause-and-go sim-
ulations), and noise. These were set to generate an or der value approximately similar to that obtained in
our experiments. See transparent methods for details and Table S1 for parameter values.
The spatial and temporal scales of the model were set as follows: 1 cm was considered as a distance of 0.1 in
the simulated arena, and 1 s corresponded to 1 simulation step. Thus, we ﬁxed the model dimensions to
correspond with real locusts’ size and movement parameters. The size of agents (0.1 3 0.4) maintains
the proportions of ﬁfth-instar larva locusts. Addition ally, the visual range of 1 radius, 10 times larger than
the agent’s rectangle width, represents the proportional visual ﬁeld of locusts (range just under 10 cm; Ariel
et al., 2014a ). The speed was set to 0.25, corresponding to the typical swarming speed shown in Figure 2 B.
F i n a l l y ,t h es i z eo ft h ea r e n aw a ss e tt ob e73 7, with 12 agents within. This generated a slightly lower den-
sity than in the real experiments, but better mimicked the limited visual ﬁeld the locusts experienced in our
ring-shaped experimental arena.
We evaluated the effect of the agent’s walking bout and pause durations, controlled by p
W and pS,o nf o u r
statistics that characterize co llective motion in the swarm:
1. The order parameter (the size of the average direction vector).
2. Spread (the average distance between all pairs).
Table 1. Correlation values between kinematic param eters throughout the thre e experimental conditions
p value rho value
Fraction of walking
Isolation-grouping <0.001 0.706
Isolation-re-isolation 0.001 0.679
Grouping-re-isolation 0.002 0.638
Speed
Isolation-grouping 0.001 0.679
Isolation-re-isolation 0.010 0.561
Grouping-re-isolation 0.002 0.636
Walking bout duration
Isolation-grouping 0.002
0.628
Isolation-re-isolation 0.148 0.391
Grouping-re-isolation 0.354 0.314
Pause duration
Isolation-grouping 0.007 0.580
Isolation-re-isolation 0.003 0.612
Grouping-re-isolation <0.001 0.708
The fraction of walking, the averaged walking speed, the average duration of walking bouts, and the average duration of
pauses were tested for correlation across the three experimental conditions: (1) isolation, (2) grouping, and (3) re-isolation.
The underlined values mark signiﬁcant correlations.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102299, April 23, 2021 5
iScience
Article

===== PAGE 7 =====
3. The number of neighbors (within the ﬁeld of view, denoted NN).
4. Regrouping time (the average number of steps it takes an agent that has lost all other agents in its
receptive ﬁeld to re-obtain at least one neighbor).
Statistics were averaged over all agents and simulation steps
Figure 4 shows the median value over 40 independent repetitions for each parameter set. We found that
the order parameter increases with the walking bout duration but decreases with pause durations
Figure 4. The inﬂuence of different walking bout and paus e durations on the collectiv ity parameters in simulated
swarms
(A) The areas representing the behavioral states in the next traces, where the black and white frames indicate the
interquartile ranges and medians of each condition, respectively, obtained from Figures 2 Ca n d2 D .
(B–E) (B) The order parameter, (C) spread, (D) the average number of agents within each agent’s visual ﬁeld, and (E) the
average number of steps to regroup, for different walking bout (rows) and pause (columns) average durations. The arena
size is 7 3 7 with periodic boundaries.
(F) The average number of steps to regroup in a large 75 3 75 arena, with the same number of agents. In (B–E) each
colored box represents the median of 40.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
6 iScience 24, 102299, April 23, 2021
iScience
Article

===== PAGE 8 =====
(Figure 4 B). The spread, on the other hand, is increasing both with walking and pausing durations ( Fig-
ure 4 C). The NN statistics ( Figure 3 D) were in accord with the spread (small spread implies many NN).
Its values were similar to that obtained in the real experimental arena ( /C241–1.5), which was slightly denser,
as explained earlier. The regrouping time ( Figure 4 E) showed a more complex dependency on the duration
of walk and pause durations: it was shortest when bo th the parameters were low and longest when the
walking bout was low but the pause duration was high. Yet, for mid values of pause duration, high walking
bouts durations induced a reduction in the number of steps to regroup. Worth noting is the fact that
because agents could only change direction when starting to move (similar to the locusts; Ariel et al.,
2014a), the length of walking segments between turns increases with walking durations.
To relate the simulation and experimental results, the three collective motion states—isolation, grouping
and re-isolation—were indicated in Figure 4 by the tiles corresponding to the interquartile range of the
empirical data presented in Figures 2 C and 2D. Additionally, we also marked the corresponding median
data point. As can be seen, in all the parameters calculated, the individual behavior that reﬂects the collec-
tive state in a crowd improves the coherency and rigidity of the swarm. This important observation suggests
a possible beneﬁt for increasing the walking bout duration when a locust is in a collective state, but ﬁnds
itself alone.
To further explore the advantages of a collective motion step in re-isolation scenarios, we increased the
size of the arena to 75 3 75, with the same number of agents, thereby reducing the density considerably,
and calculated the steps to regroup parameter ( Figure 3 E). We found that for low density, where practically
no collective behavior is present (see Figure S3 ), longer walking bouts reduce the time to regroup. There-
fore, it is beneﬁcial for an agent that ﬁnds itself alone due to a sparse distribution of the swarm to increase
its walking bouts duration (even at the cost of decreasing other parameters of collectivity), and thus shorten
the time until it reunites with other locusts.
DISCUSSION
Our ﬁndings reported here suggest that, in locusts, t he sensorimotor act of collective motion is accompa-
nied by an internal state of the indivi dual locust—a collective-motion-state, which is manifested in speciﬁc
behavioral kinematics. This state is induced by the experience of synchronous, collective marching. In turn,
it has an important role in maintaining the integrity and consistency of the swarm. Next, we discuss several
key aspects and implications of this ﬁnding.
It should be stressed once again that the current study focused on gregarious, crowded-reared locusts
only. The described behavioral states should not be confused, therefore, with the well-known and much
researched locust density-de pendent phase polyphenism ( Ayali, 2019 ; Cullen et al., 2017 ). Collective mo-
tion is limited to the gregarious, swarming, and migrating phase. Accordingly, all our experimental animals
were taken from our gregarious (crowded-reared) breeding colony, maintained in crowded conditions for
many consecutive generations. In their breeding cages, mostly due to the physical constraints and abun-
dance of food, despite experiencing high density, the locusts very rarely, if at all, demonstrate collective
motion. Thus, they adopted the collective-motion-state only upon experiencing, and taking part in, collec-
tive marching within the experimental arena.
In a recent study ( Knebel et al., 2019 ), we have introduced a comparison between the walking behavior ki-
nematics of individual gregarious locusts in different social (density) contexts. Our reported ﬁndings are
reconﬁrmed and further elucidated here by the results of the initial isolation and grouping stages in our
experiments. The novel idea posited here is that these differences represent not only the spatially and
temporally immediate social environment and the instantaneous local interactions among locusts but
also are dictated by the effects of an internal state induced by the general experience of collective motion.
A fundamental aspect of the concept of the collective-motion-state arises from our ﬁndings related to its
persistent effect in time: upon re-isolation, the individual locust adopted behavioral kinematics that criti-
cally differed from that in the ﬁrst experimental stage ( initial isolation). We also showed that, as expected,
the collective-motion-state is transient. If the locus t does not experience collective motion for some time,
and is then isolated once more, it loses the unique walking-related kinematics it previously adopted in
response to the collective motion, i.e., the internal collective-motion-state. The dynamics of this decay
were not explored, but are likely to be affected by many external factors, such as the availability of food
and the day-night cycle.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102299, April 23, 2021 7
iScience
Article

===== PAGE 9 =====
The individual locusts in our experiments retained th e variability demonstrated in our previous report ( Kne-
bel et al., 2019 ), while demonstrating a second layer of variability or plasticity upon experiencing collective
motion, when entering the collective-motion-state. Considerable research has been devoted in recent
years to understanding the effect of variability among individuals on the group’s collective behavior,
both experimentally—ranging from bacteria to primates ( Benisty et al., 2015 ; Brown and Irving, 2014 ; Crall
et al., 2016 ; Dyer et al., 2009 ; Farine et al., 2017 ; Fu¨ rtbauer and Fry, 2018 ; Herbert-Read et al., 2013 ; Jolles
et al., 2018 ; Planas-Sitja` et al., 2015 )—and theoretically ( Aplin et al., 2014 ; Ariel et al., 2014b ; Calovi et al.,
2015; Copenhagen et al., 2016 ; Guisandez et al., 2017 ; Jolles et al., 2017 ; Menzel, 2012 ; Mishra et al., 2012 ;
see Mar Delgado et al., 2018 ; Modlmeier et al., 2015 ; Webster and Ward, 2011 for recent reviews). The in-
teractions between variability in speciﬁc aspects of the individuals’ behavior and group-level processes
were found to be complex and, moreover, bidirectional (e.g., Knebel et al., 2019 ). Variability among indi-
vidual animals was found to have important consequences for the collective behavior of the group (e.g.,
O’shea-Wheller et al., 2017 ; Szorkovszky et al., 2018 ).
However, beyond the variability among the individuals composing a group, variability is also expected in
the behavior of the individual animal over time, as it experiences changes in environmental and social
conditions. The swarm (or ﬂock, shoal, herd, etc.) is a heterogeneous entity, moving in a heterogeneous
environment. The individual is bound on occasion to ﬁnd itself in different locations within the swarm
(e.g., leading edge, at the outskirts, trailing), and it m ay also ﬁnd itself separated from the group by natural
obstacles (vegetation, rocks, and boulders). It is esse ntial for the robustness and consistency of the swarm
that throughout these changing conditions the behavior of the individual will adapt accordingly, such as to
be appropriate for the changing context. For example, if temporarily separated from the core of the swarm,
a locust’s walking kinematics should change to support rapid reunion with the group, as reported in both
our experimental and simulation ﬁndings (e.g., increased fraction of walking and duration of walking
bouts). If previously naive to collective motion, that individual’s kinematics would, however, be disadvan-
tageous, or even hinder the formation of a swarm.
In Bazazi et al., 2012 , the authors suggest that beha vioral variability can be ex plained by the existence of
two internal states. Studying single locusts in isolation for 8 consecutive hours, they have observed changes
in behavioral kinematics that were suggested to result from ‘‘internal state behavioral modulation.’’ The
observed variations, however, were merely attributed to changes in ‘‘starvation/satiation state,’’ i.e., as
the locust becomes starved, it changes its walking behavior, searching more vigorously for food. Moreover,
they conclude that animals continually switch between the two states on a scale of minutes. The collective-
motion-state reported here is, of course, a very different type of internal behavioral state, which is strongly
involved with the locust past and current social environment. It may be viewed as a form, or a manifestation
of a social carryover effect ( Niemela¨ and Santostefano, 2015 ), where a social environment experienced by a
focal individual affects aspects of its locomotion behavior at a later, non-social context. As noted, however,
the change in behavioral state described here is induc ed by collective marching, i.e., a particular mode of
social interaction, rather than by aggregation or being around other conspeciﬁcs per se. Moreover, as
our simulations show, the enhanced marching displayed in the re-isolation stage is advantageous for
maintaining collective swarming—it is still much related to the social context rather than carried over to
a non-social one.
The reported collective-motion-state is also in accord with the overall daily behavioral changes of marching
locust swarms. The swarm will spend the night (as well as times of low temperature or other unfavorable
climatic conditions) roosting among the vegetation. Upon suitable conditions, after a period of feeding,
the locusts will initiate marching—highly synchronized, collective motion. Frequently, when temperature
becomes too high around noon, or when dusk arrives, the swarm will again switch to feeding and roosting.
These daily patterns call for corresponding changes in the internal behavioral states of the individual lo-
custs and mostly a dedicated collective-motion-state.
In the current work we are cautious in discussing the underlying mechanisms of the behavioral states re-
ported. Although this is beyond the scope of this study, it is clear that these behavioral states represent
physiological states. With some conﬁdence, we can speculate about the nature or the physiological mech-
anisms involved in the demonstrated behavioral states. Behavioral plasticity in locust behavior has been
attributed to various second messengers or neuromodulators, or to the balance among them. Most
notable are the biogenic amines (e.g., serotonin, a prominent bio-amine, was recently reported to inhibit
ll
OPEN ACCESS
8 iScience 24, 102299, April 23, 2021
iScience
Article

===== PAGE 10 =====
walking behavior in Drosophila ; Howard et al., 2019 ). Hence, it may well be that the (spatial and temporal)
immediate social environment affects biogenic amine levels, and these in turn modulate the walking-
related behavioral kinematics manifested in the different behavioral states.
Another candidate that may be involved in the collective-motion-state is the locust adipokinetic hormone
(AKH). AKH is a metabolic neuropeptide principally known for its mobilization of energy substrates, notably
lipid and trehalose, during energy-requiring activities such as ﬂight and locomotion, and also during stress
(e.g., Peri/C19c-Mataruga et al., 2006 ). It is well accepted that the metabolic state affects the level of general
activity of an organism, and AKHs are reported to stimu late locomotor activity, either directly by way of
their activity within the central nervous system (e.g., Wicher, 2007 ) or via octopamine—a biogenic amine
with ample behavioral effects ( Verlinden et al., 2010 ; Yang et al., 2015 ).
F u r t h e r m o r e ,a sn o t e d ,w eh a v ed e m o n s t r a t e dh e r ea ne x t e n d e de f f e c to ft h ee x p e r i e n c eo fc o l l e c t i v em o -
tion. Hence, learning and memory-related mechanisms would also seem to be involved. Again, previous
work may suggest some candidate molecules and pathways, including cGMP-dependent protein kinase
(PKG) and protein kinase A (PKA) ( Geva et al., 2010 ; Lucas et al., 2010 ; Ott et al., 2012 ).
Last, as noted, solitarious phase locusts lack the capacity to demonstrate collective motion, and thus also
the collective-motion-state. Accordingly, they diffe r from gregarious locusts in all the above-mentioned
physiological pathways (bioamines: e.g., Alessi et al., 2014 ; Cullen et al., 2017 ; Ma et al., 2015 ;A K H : Ayali
and Pener, 1992 ; Pener et al., 1997 ;P K G :Lucas et al., 2010 ;P K A :Ott et al., 2012 ). An in-depth investigation
of the development of gregarious-like states in solitary locusts should prove to be very enlightening.
A central question is whether a collective (herd, ﬂock, or swarm) is merely a sum of its parts, or a new entity.
Most related studies have perceived collectivity as a self-emergent phenomenon, suggesting that new dy-
namics and behavior are the result of intricate, multi -body, typically non-linear interactions (e.g., Cucker
and Smale, 2007 ; Vicsek and Zafeiris, 2012 ). One hidden assumption underlying this perception is that in-
dividuals remain inherently unchanged when isolated or in a crowd. Even studies of heterogeneous
swarms, in which conspeciﬁcs may differ from each other, still assume consistency in the properties of
the individual over time. This is essentially a physical point of view, in the sense that agents/individuals
possess certain properties that determine their behavior across a range of situations. Thus, the collective
motion is an emergent property that builds up in particular contexts, such as a sufﬁciently high local density
of animals. This point of view allows, among others, extrapolation from experiments with one, two, or a few
animals to large swarms (e.g., Calovi et al., 2015 ).
Our ﬁndings reported here suggest a fundamentally different point of view. We perceive the sensorimotor
act of collective motion as accompanied by an internal state—a collective-motion-state that is manifested
in speciﬁc behavioral kinematics. This state is induced by the experience of synchronous, collective motion.
Most importantly, it is not induced by spatial aggregation alone. Collectivity, therefore, is not just self-
emerging. Rather, the collective-motion-state has an important role in maintaining the integrity and con-
sistency of the swarm. The robustness of the swarm is also a major challenge and requirement in swarming
robotics, making the current novel insights applicable and even important also to this emerging ﬁeld.
In the case of locusts, our far-from-complete understanding of the swarming phenomenon is also proving
crucial for human well-being and survival, as evident from the current devastating locust situation in large
parts of Africa and Asia ( FAO, 2020 ). Much scientiﬁc attention has been dedicated to the perception, de-
cision-making, and individual kinematics of locusts in a swarm. These efforts have led to various models that
attempt to explain the collective behavior on the basis of local interactions among the individual locusts
(see Ariel and Ayali, 2015 for review). The current study is, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst to include
the internal state of the individual locust as an important factor in dictating its behavior, and in turn
affecting the maintenance and the properties of the swarm.
Limitations of the study
The study presented here outlines a post-swarming behavioral state of individuals. Clearly, as noted, this
state is induced by neurochemical changes such as secretion of neuromodulators and/or hormones. Yet, it
was beyond this research to pinpoint the exact neuronal mechanisms involved. Furthermore, the presented
model is simpliﬁed and ignores various aspects of locust swarming that might be critical. However, the
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102299, April 23, 2021 9
iScience
Article

===== PAGE 11 =====
simplicity is also a virtue of the model, which can be easily generalized to other systems. In addition,
although we show that the collective-motion-state is transient, we did not explore its temporal materiali-
zation and decline.
Data and code availability
The data will be made available upon request.
METHODS
A l lm e t h o d sc a nb ef o u n di nt h ea c c o m p a n y i n gtransparent methods supplemental ﬁle .
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10 .1016/j.isci.2021.102299 .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research has been supported by the Israel Science Foundation (research grant 2306/18).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION
D . K . ,G . A . ,a n dA . A .d e s i g n e dt h es t u d y .D . K .a n dC . S.-k. performed the experiments. D.K. and C.S.-k.
analyzed the data. D.K. N.A., and G.A constructed the model. D.K. wrote the code, performed simulations,
and analyzed the data. D.K., G.A., and A.A. wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed and approved the
paper.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: November 27, 2020
Revised: February 4, 2021
Accepted: March 5, 2021
Published: April 23, 2021
REFERENCES
Alessi, A.M., O’Connor, V., Aonuma, H., and
Newland, P.L. (2014). Dopaminergic modulation
of phase reversal in desert locusts. Front. Behav.
Neurosci. 8, 1–15.
Algar, S.D., Stemler, T., and Small, M. (2019).
From ﬂocs to ﬂocks. In A Mathematical Modeling
Approach from Nonlinear Dynamics to Complex
Systems, E.E.N. Macau, ed. (Springer),
pp. 157–175 .
Aplin, L.M., Farine, D.R., Mann, R.P., and Sheldon,
B.C. (2014). Individual-level personality inﬂuences
social foraging and collective behaviour in wild
birds. Proc. Biol. Sci. 281, 20141016 .
Ariel, G., and Ayali, A. (2015). Locust collective
motion and its modeling. PLoS Comput. Biol. 11,
1–25.
Ariel, G., Ophir, Y., Levi, S., Ben-Jacob, E., and
Ayali, A. (2014a). Individual pause-and-go motion
is instrumental to the formation and maintenance
of swarms of marching locust nymphs. PLoS One
9, e101636 .
Ariel, G., Rimer, O., and Ben-Jacob, E. (2014b).
Order–Disorder phase transition in
heterogeneous populations of self-propelled
particles. J. Stat. Phys. 158, 579–588 .
Attanasi, A., Cavagna, A., Del Castello, L.,
Giardina, I., Melillo, S., Parisi, L., Pohl, O.,
Rossaro, B., Shen, E., Silvestri, E., and Viale, M.
(2014). Collective behaviour without collective
order in wild swarms of midges. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 10, 1–10 .
Ayali, A. (2019). The puzzle of locust density-
dependent phase polyphenism. Curr. Opin.
Insect Sci. 35, 41–47 .
Ayali, A., and Pener, M.P. (1992). Density-
dependent phase polymorphism affects
response to adipokinetic hormone in Locusta.
Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A Physiol. 101, 549–552.
Bazazi, S., Bartumeus, F., Hale, J.J., and Couzin,
I.D. (2012). Intermittent motion in desert locusts:
behavioural complexity in simple environments.
PLoS Comput. Biol. 8, e1002498 .
Bazazi, S., Buhl, J., Hale, J.J., Anstey, M.L., Sword,
G.A., Simpson, S.J., and Couzin, I.D. (2008).
Collective motion and cannibalism in locust
migratory bands. Curr. Biol. 18, 735–739 .
Be’er, A., and Ariel, G. (2019). A statistical physics
view of swarming bacteria. Mov. Ecol. 7, 1–17.
Benisty, S., Ben-Jacob, E., Ariel, G., and Be’er, A.
(2015). Antibiotic-induced anomalous statistics of
collective bacterial swarming. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114,
1–5.
Brown, C., and Irving, E. (2014). Individual
personality traits inﬂuence group exploration in a
feral guppy population. Behav. Ecol. 25, 95–101 .
Calovi, D.S., Lopez, U., Schuhmacher, P., Chate ´ ,
H., Sire, C., and Theraulaz, G. (2015). Collective
response to perturbations in a data-driven ﬁsh
school model. J. R. Soc. Interface 12, 20141362 .
Cavagna, A., Cimarelli, A., Giardina, I., Parisi, G.,
Santagati, R., Stefanini, F., and Viale, M. (2010).
Scale-free correlations in starling ﬂocks. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 107, 11865–11870 .
Copenhagen, K., Quint, D.A., and Gopinathan, A.
(2016). Self-organized sorting limits behavioral
variability in swarms. Sci. Rep. 6, 1–11.
Crall, J.D., Souffrant, A.D., Akandwanaho, D.,
Hescock, S.D., Callan, S.E., Coronado, W.M.,
Baldwin, M.W., and de Bivort, B.L. (2016). Social
context modulates idiosyncrasy of behaviour in
the gregarious cockroach Blaberus discoidalis.
Anim. Behav. 111, 297–305 .
Cucker, F., and Smale, S. (2007). Emergent
behavior in ﬂocks. IEEE Trans. Automat. Contr.
52, 852–862 .
ll
OPEN ACCESS
10 iScience 24, 102299, April 23, 2021
iScience
Article

===== PAGE 12 =====
Cullen, D.A., Cease, A.J., Latchininsky, A.V., Ayali,
A., Berry, K., Buhl, J., De Keyser, R., Foquet, B.,
Hadrich, J.C., Matheson, T., et al. (2017). From
molecules to management: mechanisms and
consequences of locust phase polyphenism. Adv.
Insect Physiol. 53, 167–285 .
Dyer, J.R.G., Croft, D.P., Morrell, L.J., and Krause,
J. (2009). Shoal composition determines foraging
success in the guppy. Behav. Ecol. 20, 165–171 .
Ellis, P.E., and Ashall, C. (1957). Field studies on
diurnal behaviour, movement and aggregation in
the desert locust (Schistocerca gregaria forsk ǻl).
Anti-locust Bull. 25, 1–103.
Escaff, D., Toral, R., Van Den Broeck, C., and
Lindenberg, K. (2018). A continuous-time
persistent random walk model for ﬂocking. Chaos
28, 075507 .
FAO (2020). Desert Locust Situation Update - 21
April 2020 (Food Agric. Organ. United Nations) .
Farine, D.R., Strandburg-Peshkin, A., Couzin, I.D.,
Berger-Wolf, T.Y., and Crofoot, M.C. (2017).
Individual variation in local interaction rules can
explain emergent patterns of spatial organisation
in wild baboons. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 284,
20162243.
Fu¨ rtbauer, I., and Fry, A. (2018). Social conformity
in solitary crabs, Carcinus maenas, is driven by
individual differences in behavioural plasticity.
Anim. Behav. 135, 131–137 .
Geva, N., Guershon, M., Orlova, M., and Ayali, A.
(2010). Memoirs of a locust: density-dependent
behavioral change as a model for learning and
memory. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 93, 175–182 .
Guisandez, L., Baglietto, G., and Rozenfeld, A.
(2017). Heterogeneity Promotes First to Second
Order Phase Transition on Flocking Systems 1–
11.
Herbert-Read, J.E., Krause, S., Morrell, L.J.,
Schaerf, T.M., Krause, J., and Ward, A.J.W. (2013).
The role of individuality in collective group
movement. Proc. Biol. Sci. 280, 20122564 .
Howard, C.E., Chen, C.L., Tabachnik, T.,
Hormigo, R., Ramdya, P., and Mann, R.S. (2019).
Serotonergic modulation of walking in
Drosophila. Curr. Biol. 29, 4218–4230.e8 .
Jolles, J.W., Boogert, N.J., Sridhar, V.H., Couzin,
I.D., and Manica, A. (2017). Consistent individual
differences drive collective behavior and group
functioning of schooling ﬁsh. Curr. Biol. 2862–
2868.e7.
Jolles, J.W., Laskowski, K.L., Boogert, N.J., and
Manica, A. (2018). Repeatable group differences
in the collective behaviour of stickleback shoals
across ecological contexts. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol.
Sci. 285, 13–16 .
Knebel, D., Ayali, A., Guershon, M., and Ariel, G.
(2019). Intra- versus intergroup variance in
collective behavior. Sci. Adv. 5, eaav0695 .
Lucas, C., Kornfein, R., Chakaborty-Chatterjee,
M., Schonfeld, J., Geva, N., Sokolowski, M.B., and
Ayali, A. (2010). The locust foraging gene. Arch.
Insect Biochem. Physiol. 74, 52–66 .
Ma, Z., Guo, X., Lei, H., Li, T., Hao, S., and Kang, L.
(2015). Octopamine and tyramine respectively
regulate attractive and repulsive behavior in
locust phase changes. Sci. Rep. 5, 1–11.
Mar Delgado, M.del, Miranda, M., Alvarez, S.J.,
Gurarie, E., Fagan, W.F., Penteriani, V., di Virgilio,
A., and Morales, J.M. (2018). The importance of
individual variation in the dynamics of animal
collective movements. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond.
B Biol. Sci. 373, 20170008 .
Menzel, A.M. (2012). Collective motion of binary
self-propelled particle mixtures. Phys. Rev. E Stat.
Nonlin. Soft Matter Phys. 85, 31–33 .
Mishra, S., Tunstrøm, K., Couzin, I.D., and Huepe,
C. (2012). Collective dynamics of self-propelled
particles with variable speed. Phys. Rev. E 86,
011901.
Modlmeier, A.P., Keiser, C.N., Wright, C.M.,
Lichtenstein, J.L.L., and Pruitt, J.N. (2015).
Integrating animal personality into insect
population and community ecology. Curr. Opin.
Insect Sci. 9, 77–85 .
Niemela¨ , P.T., and Santostefano, F. (2015). Social
carry-over effects on non-social behavioral
variation: mechanisms and consequences. Front.
Ecol. Evol. 3, 1–12.
O’shea-Wheller, T.A., Masuda, N., Sendova-
Franks, A.B., and Franks, N.R. (2017). Variability in
individual assessment behaviour and its
implications for collective decision-making. Proc.
R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 284, 1–7 .
Ott, S.R., Verlinden, H., Rogers, S.M., Brighton,
C.H., Quah, P.S., Vleugels, R.K., Verdonck, R., and
Broeck, J. Vanden (2012). Critical role for protein
kinase A in the acquisition of gregarious behavior
in the desert locust. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A
109, 381–387 .
Pener, M.P., Ayali, A., and Golenser, E. (1997).
Adipokinetic hormone and ﬂight fuel related
characteristics of density-dependent locust
phase polymorphism: a review. Comp. Biochem.
Physiol. B Biochem. Mol. Biol. 117, 513–524 .
Peri/C19c-Mataruga, V., Nenadovi /C19c, V., and Ivanovi /C19c,
J. (2006). Neurohormones in insect stress: a
review. Arch. Biol. Sci. 58, 1–12 .
Planas-Sitja` , I., Deneubourg, J.-L., Gibon, C., and
Sempo, G. (2015). Group personality during
collective decision-making: a multi-level
approach. Proc. Biol. Sci. 282, 20142515 .
Rimer, O., and Ariel, G. (2017). Kinetic order-
disorder transitions in a pause-and-go swarming
model with memory. J. Theor. Biol. 419, 90–99 .
Sumpter, D.J.T. (2006). The principles of
collective animal behaviour. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
B Biol. Sci. 361, 5–22.
Szorkovszky, A., Kotrschal, A., Herbert-Read, J.E.,
Buechel, S.D., Romenskyy, M., Rose ´ n, E., van der
Bijl, W., Pelckmans, K., Kolm, N., and Sumpter,
D.J.T. (2018). Assortative interactions revealed by
sorting of animal groups. Anim. Behav. 142,
165–179.
Uvarov, B. (1977). Grasshoppers and Locusts: A
Handbook of General Acridology (Centre for
Overseas Pest Research) .
Verlinden, H., Vleugels, R., Marchal, E., Badisco,
L., Pﬂu¨ ger, H.J., Blenau, W., and Broeck, J.
Vanden (2010). The role of octopamine in locusts
and other arthropods. J. Insect Physiol. 56,
854–867.
Vicsek, T., and Zafeiris, A. (2012). Collective
motion. Phys. Rep. 517, 71–140 .
Ward, A., and Webster, M. (2016). Sociality: The
Behaviour of Group-Living Animals (Springer
International Publishing) .
Webster, M.M., and Ward, A.J.W. (2011).
Personality and social context. Biol. Rev. 86,
759–773.
Wicher, D. (2007). Metabolic regulation and
behavior: how hunger produces arousal - an
insect study. Endocr. Metab. Immune Disord.
Drug Targets 7, 304–310 .
Yang, W.C., and Schmickl, T. (2019). Collective
motion as an ultimate effect in crowded selﬁsh
herds. Sci. Rep. 9, 1–11.
Yang, Z., Yu, Y., Zhang, V., Tian, Y., Qi, W., and
Wang, L. (2015). Octopamine mediates
starvation-induced hyperactivity in adult
Drosophila. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 112, 5219–
5224.
Zhang, L., Lecoq, M., Latchininsky, A., and Hunter,
D. (2019). Locust and grasshopper management.
Annu. Rev. Entomol. 64, 15–34.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102299, April 23, 2021 11
iScience
Article

===== PAGE 13 =====
iScience, Volume24
Supplemental information
Collective motion as a distinct
behavioral state of the individual
Daniel Knebel, Ciona Sha-ked, Noa Agmon, Gil Ariel, and Amir Ayali

===== PAGE 14 =====
1 
 
Supplemental information 
Figures and tables 
Variable Value 
Simulation 
parameters 
Num. of agents (N) 12 
Num. of steps 1000 
Arena size (periodic boundaries; L) 7 x 7 / 75 x 75 
Agents 
dimensions 
Size of agents (a1 x a2) 0.1 x 0.4 
Visual range radius (r) 1 
Movement 
parameters 
Probability to stop (ps) 0.5 - 0.917 
Probability to walk (pw) 0.8 - 0.933 
Speed (v) 0.25 
Direction 
parameters 
Inertia weight (q1) 0.2 
Current surrounding weight (q2) 0.2 
Memory surrounding weight (q3) 0.3 
Memory length (of surrounding memory) 5 
Random vector weight (q4) 0.3 
 
Table S1. Model parameters. 

===== PAGE 15 =====
2 
 
 
 
Fig. S1. Kinematic changes throughout the three experimental conditions  – exact data points and trends . (A) 
the fraction of walking, ( B) the averaged walking speed, (C) the average duration of walking bouts, and ( D) the 
average duration of pauses, of the traced animals in the isolation, grouping, and re -isolation stages. Blue lines 
represent increase and red lines decrease between consequent experimental condit ions of individual animals 
(n=26). *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001. 
 


===== PAGE 16 =====
3 
 
 
 
Figure S2. Walking and pause durations for different pW and pS values. The median bout and pause durations 
presented in Fig. 4, arranged by their corresponding pW and pS (blue and red, respectively). 
  


===== PAGE 17 =====
4 
 
 
 
Figure S3. The influence of different walking bouts and pauses duration  on the collectivity parameters of 
simulated swarms in an arena of 75x75. The order parameter, spread and the average number of agents within 
each agent’s visual field for different walking bouts (rows) and pauses (columns) durations. Notice that the low 
numbers and minor changes between the boxes indicate that there was minimal to no collective behaviour in 
the 75x75 sized arena. Each box represents the median of 100 simulations. 
 


===== PAGE 18 =====
5 
 
Transparent Methods 
Animals 
The empirical experiments were conducted on gregarious desert locusts, Schistocerca 
gregaria (Forsskål), bred at Tel Aviv University, School of Zoology. The animals were kept at 
high density: over 100 animals in cages of 60 l, under a 12 h:12 h light/dark regime, a 
temperature of 30℃, and 30-65 % humidity. Animals were fed daily with wheat seedlings and 
dry oats. All experimental locusts were the offspring of many generations of gregarious 
locusts reared in these conditions. 
Experimental setup 
A ring-shaped arena was used for the assessment of the behaviours of individuals and 
swarms. It comprised blue plastic walls (60 cm diameter and 55 cm high) with an inner central 
cone dome (30 cm diameter). The bottom of the structure was covered with a thin layer of 
Fluon (Whitford Plastics Ltd., Runcorn, UK), in order to prevent locusts from climbing. A white 
paper covered the floor of the arena and was changed before each experiment. Light sources 
around the arena lit its f loor evenly. A video camera (Sony FDR -AXP35: 4K Ultra HD) was 
positioned above the arena and filmed the locusts throughout the experiment. 
Monitoring the locust movements 
Prior to the experiments, each of the experimented locusts was tagged with a unique 
barcode glued to the dorsal side of its prothorax using a drop of Epoxy glue. Using the video 
footage at 25/3 frames per second, the trajectory of each animal was reconstructed offline 
using BugTag software (Robiotec Ltd., Israel). To this we added a custom -designed multiple-
target tracking and a trajectory -smoothing method (for details: Ariel et al., 2014a ). briefly, 

===== PAGE 19 =====
6 
 
segments in which tags were not identified (less than 5 cm or 25 s) by the system positions 
were interpolated. We thus obtained the positions of the tags’ centre of mass relative to the 
arena centre, at a final resolution of 2 -3 pixels (ca. 0.5 mm), for about 99% of the video 
frames. In order to reach 100% recognition, we completed the analysis manually for the 
remaining frames. In three out of the 26 experiment the tracking system failed to recognise 
1-2 animals in the grouping stage. Therefore, the order parameter was calculated based on 
the recognized animals only . These miss -identifications, which only slightly  affect the order 
parameter calculated in the grouping stage, have no influence on any of the kinematic 
statistics in any of the stages (that only describe the focal animal). 
Experimental procedure 
In the morning of each experiment day, 10 locusts were tak en from their cage and 
individually tagged. Thereafter, one locust was randomly chosen and placed in the arena 
alone for one hour. The other 9 locusts were then added for an additional hour; after which 
they were removed. The remaining locust was then filmed for another hour. 
Analysed parameters 
Following the recognition process, we analysed the middle 40 min of each of the 3 hours 
of the experiment using MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA). The following parameters 
were calculated: 
1. Order parameter – the absolute value of the average direction of movement of the 
walking animals (clockwise denoted as -1 and anticlockwise as +1), averaged for all the 
frames. 
2. Fraction of walking – the number of frames an animal walked divided by the total 
number of analysed frames. 

===== PAGE 20 =====
7 
 
3. Detection of walking bouts – a walking period was defined as walking at a speed above 
0.25 cm/sec for more than one third of a second. This double threshold allowed us to 
overcome the limitation of the tracking system and avoid recognizing very small 
movements as real walking. 
4. Speed – averaged for all experimental animals and analysed frames when the animal 
walked and the speed differed from zero. 
5. Walking bout duration – the time an animal moved continuously between one pause 
to the next, averaged for all walking bouts.  
6. Pause duration – the time an animal did not walk between one walking bout and the 
next, averaged for all pauses. 
Statistical analysis 
All statistical tests were conducted with MATLAB. To compare the order parameters, 
Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used. To compare among the three stages, Friedman Test was 
used. Since all comparisons were significant according to the latter test, Bonferroni multiple 
comparison post -hoc test accompanied each Friedman Test, in order to reveal the 
significantly different groups. The p values noted are of the Bonferroni multiple comparison 
post-hoc test. Correlations were conducted using Spearman's Rank Correlation test.  
Modelling 
We employed a two-dimensional model comprising 𝑁 agents moving at a fixed speed 
𝑣 in a square domain of linear size L and periodic boundaries. Position and heading (direction) 
of each rectangle centre were denoted by 𝑥𝑖(𝑡) and 𝑣̂𝑖(𝑡), respectively, where 𝑥𝑖(𝑡) ∈ [0, 𝐿]2 
and ‖𝑣̂𝑖(𝑡)‖ = 1. In addition,  𝑤𝑖(𝑡) is a Boolean variable that denoted whether at time t, 

===== PAGE 21 =====
8 
 
agent i is moving (𝑤𝑖(𝑡) = 1) or pausing (𝑤𝑖(𝑡) = 0). In order to take into account the physical 
size of animals, we assumed that each agent is a rectangle with sides 𝑎1 × 𝑎2. 
In each simulation step, the position of moving agents changed by amount v in the direction  
𝑣̂𝑖(𝑡),  
 
𝑥𝑖(𝑡 + 1) = 𝑥𝑖(𝑡) + 𝑣𝑤𝑖(𝑡)𝑣̂𝑖(𝑡)   (𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝐿). 
 
The new velocity of agent 𝑖 depended on three terms: i. Inertia (its own direction); ii. the 
direction of other agents in its receptive field (see below), possibly with a memory; and iii. a 
random vector with unit norm 𝜉𝑖(𝑡). The receptive field view is a circle around 𝑥𝑖(𝑡). Unlike 
previous models, we assumed that an agent sees all other agents whose rectangle is within a 
distance r from 𝑥𝑖(𝑡), and not merely the center of the rectangle. Denoting the four corners 
of the rectangle describing agent j as indexes 𝑐𝑗
1(𝑡), … , 𝑐𝑗
4(𝑡), we defined the edges of the 
rectangle as the line segment  𝑒𝑗
𝑘(𝑡) = [𝑐𝑗
𝑘(𝑡), 𝑐𝑗
𝑘+1(𝑡)], where 𝑐𝑗
5(𝑡) = 𝑐𝑗
1(𝑡). The adjacency 
matrix 𝐴𝑖𝑗(𝑡) is a zero-one matrix that is one if agent j can be observed by agent i at time t, 
i.e., 
𝐴𝑖𝑗(𝑡) = {1 (𝑒𝑗
1(𝑡) ∪ 𝑒𝑗
2(𝑡) ∪ 𝑒𝑗
3(𝑡) ∪ 𝑒𝑗
4(𝑡)) ∩ {𝑥: ‖𝑥𝑖(𝑡) −  𝑥‖ ≤ 𝑟} ≠ 𝜙
0 otherwise
 
Then, the set of observable neighbours of agent i at time t as, 
𝐼𝑖(𝑡) ≔ ∑ 𝐴𝑖𝑗(𝑡)𝑖≠𝑗 . 
The average direction in the receptive field at time 𝑡, is 𝑢̂𝑖(𝑡) = 𝑢𝑖(𝑡)/‖𝑢𝑖(𝑡)‖, where 
 
𝑢𝑖(𝑡) =  ( 1
𝑛𝑖(𝑡) ∑ cos(𝑣̂𝑗)
𝑗∈𝐼𝑖(𝑡)
, 1
𝑛𝑖(𝑡) ∑ sin(𝑣̂𝑗)
𝑗∈𝐼𝑖(𝑡)
 ). 

===== PAGE 22 =====
9 
 
 
Here, 𝑛𝑖(𝑡) is the number of elements in 𝐼𝑖(𝑡). 
Overall, the new heading 𝑣̂𝑖(𝑡 + 1) was the weighted average of four terms: inertia, 
direction of moving intersecting rectangles at time 𝑡, the average heading of movin g 
intersecting rectangles at time [𝑡 − 5 … 𝑡 − 1], and independent random vector with unit 
norm 𝜉𝑖(𝑡) from a uniform distribution of [−𝜋, 𝜋]. Angles of other agents to the focal agent 
were provided by the simulator. Let the set of the weights be [𝑞1 … 𝑞4].The updated weighted 
averaged direction, was, therefore, 𝑣̂𝑖(𝑡) = 𝑣𝑖(𝑡)/‖𝑣𝑖(𝑡)‖,  where 
  
𝑣𝑖(𝑡 + 1) = 𝑞1𝑣̂𝑖(𝑡) + 𝑞2𝑢̂𝑖(𝑡) + 𝑞3
1
5 ∑ 𝑢̂(𝑡 − 𝑠)
5
𝑠=1
+ 𝑞4𝜉𝑖(𝑡) 
The weights were set to 𝑄 = [0.2, 0.2, 0.3, 0.3]. Collisions of agents with each other were not 
taken into account, as our previous study found that visual stimuli is sufficient for generating 
collective behaviour (Ariel et al., 2014a).   
Switching between walking and pausing was determined as follows. Assuming 
exponential distributions of moving and pausing durations, the probability to proceed moving 
was given by a single parameter, 𝑝𝑤, describing the probability per -step of an agent to 
continue walking, 𝑝w = 𝑃(𝑤𝑖(𝑡 + 1) = 1|𝑤𝑖(𝑡) =  1). Similarly, 𝑝s = 𝑃(𝑤𝑖(𝑡 + 1) =
0|𝑤𝑖(𝑡) =  0) was the probability per-step that a stopping agent will continue stopping. 
The following statistics were calculated over steps 200 -1000 of the simulation. Brackets 
denote averaging over all analysed frames. 
1. Order: 𝜃(𝑡) =
1
𝑁 〈‖∑ 𝑣̂𝑖
𝑁
𝑖=1 ‖〉 .  
2. Spread: 𝑆(𝑡) =
1
𝑁(𝑁−1) 〈∑ ∑ |𝑥𝑖(𝑡) −  𝑥𝑗(𝑡)|𝑗≠𝑖
𝑁
𝑖=1 〉 

===== PAGE 23 =====
10 
 
3. Number of neighbours:  𝑛𝑖(𝑡) =
1
𝑁 〈∑ 𝐼𝑖(𝑡)𝑁
𝑖=1 〉  
4. Steps to regroup: the number of steps that passed from the first step in which an agent 
has no neighbours within its visual field ( 𝑛𝑖(𝑡) = 0)  until it encounters a neighbour 
again (𝑛𝑖(𝑡 + 𝑠) > 0). 
 
 