

===== PAGE 1 =====


===== PAGE 2 =====
HONEYBEE
DEMOCRACY
THOMAS	D.	SEELEY
	
PRINCETON	UNIVERSITY	PRESS
PRINCETON	AND	OXFORD

===== PAGE 3 =====
Copyright	©	2010	by	Princeton	University	Press
Published	by	Princeton	University	Press,	41	William	Street,
Princeton,	New	Jersey	08540
In	the	United	Kingdom:	Princeton	University	Press,	6	Oxford	Street,
Woodstock,	Oxfordshire	OX20	1TW
press.princeton.edu
All	Rights	Reserved
Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data
Seeley,	Thomas	D.
Honeybee	democracy	/Thomas	D.	Seeley.
p.	cm.
Includes	bibliographical	references	and	index.
ISBN	978-0-691-14721-5	(alk.	paper)
1.	Honeybee—Behavior.	2.	insect	societies.	I.	Title.
QL568.A6S439			2010
595.79'9156—dc22				2010010265
British	Library	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data	is	available
This	book	has	been	composed	in	Perpetua
Printed	on	acid-free	paper.	∞
Printed	in	the	United	States	of	America
1	3	5	7	9	10	8	6	4	2

===== PAGE 4 =====
Contents
								
PROLOGUE
		
1				INTRODUCTION
		
2				LIFE	IN	A	HONEYBEE	COLONY
		
3				DREAM	HOME	FOR	HONEYBEES
		
4				SCOUT	BEES'	DEBATE
		
5				AGREEMENT	ON	BEST	SITE
		
6				BUILDING	A	CONSENSUS
		
7				INITIATING	THE	MOVE	TO	NEW	HOME
		
8				STEERING	THE	FLYING	SWARM
		
9				SWARM	AS	COGNITIVE	ENTITY
10				SWARM	SMARTS
														
EPILOGUE
	
														
Notes
														
Acknowledgments

===== PAGE 5 =====
														
Illustration	Credits
														
Index

===== PAGE 6 =====
PROLOGUE
B
eekeepers	have	long	observed,	and	lamented,	the	tendency	of	their	hives	to
swarm	in	the	late	spring	and	early	summer.	When	this	happens,	the	majority	of	a
colony’s	members—a	crowd	of	some	ten	thousand	worker	bees—fies	of	with	the
old	queen	to	produce	a	daughter	colony,	while	the	rest	stays	at	home	and	rears	a
new	queen	to	perpetuate	the	parental	colony.	The	migrating	bees	settle	on	a	tree
branch	in	a	beardlike	cluster	and	then	hang	there	together	for	several	hours	or	a
few	days.	During	this	time,	these	homeless	insects	will	do	something	truly
amazing;	they	will	hold	a	democratic	debate	to	choose	their	new	home.
This	book	is	about	how	honeybees	conduct	this	democratic	decision-making
process.	We	will	examine	the	way	that	several	hundred	of	a	swarm’s	oldest	bees
spring	into	action	as	nest-site	scouts	and	begin	exploring	the	countryside	for	dark
crevices.	We	will	see	how	these	house	hunters	evaluate	the	potential	dwelling
places	they	find;	advertise	their	discoveries	to	their	fellow	scouts	with	lively
dances;	debate	vigorously	to	choose	the	best	nest	site,	then	rouse	the	entire
swarm	to	take	off;	and	finally	pilot	the	cloud	of	airborne	bees	to	its	home.	This	is
typically	a	hollow	tree	several	miles	away.
My	motive	for	writing	this	book	about	democracy	in	honeybee	swarms	is
twofold.	First,	I	want	to	present	to	biologists	and	social	scientists	a	coherent
summary	of	the	research	on	this	topic	that	has	been	conducted	over	the	last	60
years,	starting	with	the	work	of	Martin	Lindauer	in	Germany.	Until	now,	the
information	on	this	subject	has	remained	scattered	among	dozens	of	papers
published	in	numerous	scientific	journals,	which	makes	it	hard	to	see	how	each
discovery	is	connected	to	all	the	others.	The	story	of	how	honeybees	make	a
democratic	decision	based	on	a	face-to-face,	consensus-seeking	assembly	is
certainly	important	to	behavioral	biologists	interested	in	how	social	animals
make	group	decisions.	
I	hope	it	will	also	prove	important	to	neuroscientists
studying	the	neural	basis	of	decision	making,	for	there	are	intriguing	similarities
between	honeybee	swarms	and	primate	brains	in	the	ways	that	they	process
information	to	make	decisions.	Furthermore,	I	hope	the	story	of	the	house-
hunting	bees	will	be	helpful	to	social	scientists	in	their	search	for	ways	to	raise
the	reliability	of	decision	making	by	human	groups.	One	important	lesson	that

===== PAGE 7 =====
we	can	glean	from	the	bees	in	this	regard	is	that	even	in	a	group	composed	of
friendly	individuals	with	common	interests,	conflict	can	be	a	useful	element	in	a
decision-making	process.	That	is,	it	often	pays	a	group	to	
argue
	things	carefully
through	to	find	the	best	solution	to	a	tough	problem.
My	second	motive	for	writing	this	book	is	to	share	with	beekeepers	and
general	readers	the	pleasures	I	have	experienced	in	investigating	swarms	of
honeybees.	I	can	thank	these	beautiful	little	creatures	for	many	hours	of	the
purest	joy	of	discovery,	interspersed	among	(to	be	sure)	days	and	weeks	of
fruitless	and	sometimes	discouraging	work.	To	give	a	sense	of	the	excitement
and	challenge	of	studying	the	bees,	I	will	report	numerous	personal	events,
speculations,	and	thoughts	about	conducting	scientific	studies.
The	work	described	here	rests	on	a	solid	foundation	of	knowledge	that	the	late
Professor	Martin	Lindauer	(1918–2008)	created	with	his	studies	of	the
househunting	bees	in	the	1950s.	I	wish	to	dedicate	this	book	to	Martin	Lindauer,
my	friend	and	teacher,	whose	pioneering	investigations	inspired	my	own
explorations	of	the	wonderland	of	the	bees’	society.
Tom	Seeley
Ithaca,	New	York

===== PAGE 8 =====
1
INTRODUCTION
Go	to	the	bee
,
thou	poet:
consider	her	ways
and	be	wise.
—George	Bernard	Shaw
,	Man	and	Superman,
	1903
	
	
H
oneybees	are	sweetness	and	light—producers	of	honey	and	beeswax—so	it	is
no	great	wonder	that	humans	have	prized	these	small	creatures	since	ancient
times.	Even	today,	when	rich	sweets	and	bright	lights	are	commonplace,	we
humans	continue	to	treasure	these	hard-working	insects,	especially	the	200
billion	or	so	that	live	in	partnership	with	commercial	beekeepers	and	perform	on
our	behalf	a	critical	agricultural	mission:	go	forth	and	pollinate.	In	North
America,	the	managed	honeybees	are	the	primary	pollinators	for	some	50	fruit
and	vegetable	crops,	which	together	form	the	most	nutritious	portion	of	our	daily
diet.	But	honeybees	also	provide	us	another	great	gift,	one	that	feeds	our	brains
rather	than	our	bellies,	for	inside	each	teeming	beehive	is	an	exemplar	of	a
community	whose	members	succeed	in	working	together	to	achieve	shared
goals.	We	will	see	that	these	little	six-legged	beauties	have	something	to	teach	us
about	building	smoothly	functioning	groups,	especially	ones	capable	of
exploiting	fully	the	power	of	democratic	decision	making.
Our	lessons	will	come	from	just	one	species	of	honeybee,	
Apis	mellifera
,	the
best-known	insect	on	the	planet.	Originally	native	to	western	Asia,	the	
Middle
East,	Africa,	and	Europe,	it	is	now	found	in	temperate	and	tropical	regions
throughout	the	world	thanks	to	the	dispersal	efforts	of	its	human	admirers.	It	is	a
bee	that	is	beautifully	social.	We	can	see	this	beauty	in	their	nests	of	golden
combs,	those	exquisite	arrays	of	hexagonal	cells	sculpted	of	thinnest	beeswax

===== PAGE 9 =====
(
fig.	1.1
).	We	can	see	it	further	in	their	harmonious	societies,	wherein	tens	of
thousands	of	worker	bees,	through	enlightened	self-interest,	cooperate	to	serve	a
colony’s	common	good.	And	in	this	book,	we	will	see	the	social	beauty	of
honeybees	vividly,	and	in	fine	detail,	by	examining	how	a	colony	achieves	near-
perfect	accuracy	when	it	selects	its	home.
Choosing	the	right	dwelling	place	is	a	life-or-death	matter	for	a	honeybee
colony.	If	a	colony	chooses	poorly,	and	so	occupies	a	nest	cavity	that	is	too	small
to	hold	the	honey	stores	it	needs	to	survive	winter,	or	that	provides	it	with	poor
protection	from	cold	winds	and	hungry	marauders,	then	it	will	die.	Given	the
vital	importance	of	choosing	a	suitably	roomy	and	snug	homesite,	it	is	not
surprising	that	a	colony’s	choice	of	its	living	quarters	is	made	not	by	a	few	bees
acting	alone	but	by	several	hundred	bees	acting	collectively.	This	book	is	about
how	this	sizable	search	committee	almost	always	makes	a	good	choice.	We	will
uncover	the	means	by	which	these	house-hunting	bees	scour	the	neighborhood
for	potential	nest	sites,	report	the	news	of	their	discoveries,	conduct	a	frank
debate	about	these	options,	and	ultimately	reach	an	agreement	about	which	site
will	be	their	colony’s	new	dwelling	place.	In	short,	we	will	examine	the
ingenious	workings	of	honeybee	democracy.
There	is	one	common	misunderstanding	about	the	inner	operations	of	a
honeybee	colony	that	I	must	dispel	at	the	outset,	namely	that	a	colony	is
governed	by	a	benevolent	dictator,	Her	Majesty	the	Queen.	The	belief	that	a

===== PAGE 10 =====
colony’s	coherence	derives	from	an	omniscient	queen	(or	king)	telling	the
workers	what	to	do	is	centuries	old,	tracing	back	to	Aristotle	and	persisting	until
modern	times.	But	it	is	false.	What	is	true	is	that	a	colony’s	queen	lies	at	the
heart	of	the	whole	operation,	for	a	honeybee	colony	is	an	immense	family
consisting	of	the	mother	queen	and	her	thousands	of	progeny.	It	is	also	true	that
the	many	thousands	of	attentive	daughters	(the	workers)	of	the	mother	queen	are,
ultimately,	all	striving	to	promote	her	survival	and	reproduction.	Nevertheless,	a
colony’s	queen	is	not	the	Royal	Decider.	Rather,	she	is	the	Royal	Ovipositer.
Each	summer	day,	she	monotonously	lays	the	1,500	or	so	eggs	needed	to
maintain	her	colony’s	workforce.	She	is	oblivious	of	her	colony’s	ever-changing
labor	needs—for	example,	more	comb	builders	here,	fewer	pollen	foragers	there
—to	which	the	colony’s	staff	of	worker	bees	steadily	adapts	itself.	The	only
known	dominion	exercised	by	the	queen	is	the	suppression	of	rearing	additional
queens.	She	accomplishes	this	with	a	glandular	secretion,	called	“queen
substance,”	that	workers	contacting	her	pick	up	on	their	antennae	and	distribute
to	all	corners	of	the	hive.	In	this	way,	these	workers	spread	the	word	that	their
mother	queen	is	alive	and	well,	hence	there	is	no	need	to	rear	a	new	queen.	So
the	mother	queen	is	not	the	workers’	boss.	Indeed,	there	is	no	all-knowing
central	planner	supervising	the	thousands	and	thousands	of	worker	bees	in	a
colony.	The	work	of	a	hive	is	instead	governed	collectively	by	the	workers
themselves,	each	one	an	alert	individual	making	tours	of	inspection	looking	for
things	to	do	and	acting	on	her	own	to	serve	the	community.	Living	close
together,	connected	by	the	network	of	their	shared	
environment	and	a	repertoire
of	signals	for	informing	one	another	of	urgent	labor	needs—for	example,	dances
that	direct	foragers	to	flowers	brimming	with	sweet	nectar—the	workers	achieve
an	enviable	harmony	of	labor	without	supervision.
Collective	Intelligence
This	book	focuses	on	what	I	believe	is	the	most	wondrous	example	of	how	the
multitude	of	bees	in	a	hive,	much	like	the	multitude	of	cells	in	a	body,	work
together	without	an	overseer	to	create	a	functional	unit	whose	abilities	far
transcend	those	of	its	constituents.	Specifically,	we	will	examine	how	a	swarm	of
honeybees	achieves	a	form	of	collective	intelligence	in	the	choice	of	its	home.
As	will	be	described	in	
chapter	2
,	the	bees’	process	of	house	hunting	unfolds	in
late	spring	and	early	summer,	when	colonies	become	overcrowded	in	their
nesting	cavities	(bee	hives	and	tree	hollows)	and	then	cast	a	swarm.	When	this
happens,	about	a	third	of	the	worker	bees	stay	at	home	and	rear	a	new	queen,
thereby	perpetuating	the	mother	colony,	while	the	other	two-thirds	of	the

===== PAGE 11 =====
workforce—a	group	of	some	ten	thousand—rushes	of	with	the	old	queen	to
create	a	daughter	colony.	The	migrants	travel	only	30	meters	(about	100	feet)	or
so	before	coalescing	into	a	beardlike	cluster,	where	they	literally	hang	out
together	for	several	hours	or	a	few	days	(
fig.	1.2
).	Once	bivouacked,	the	swarm
will	field	several	hundred	house	hunters	to	explore	some	70	square	kilometers
(30	square	miles)	of	the	surrounding	landscape	for	potential	homesites,	locate	a
dozen	or	more	possibilities,	evaluate	each	one	with	respect	to	the	multiple
criteria	that	define	a	bee’s	dream	home,	and	democratically	select	a	favorite	for
their	new	domicile.	The	bees’	collective	judgment	almost	always	favors	the	site
that	best	fulfills	their	need	for	sufficiently	spacious	and	highly	protective
accommodations.	Then,	shortly	after	completing	their	selection	process,	the
swarm	bees	implement	their	choice	by	taking	flight	en	masse	and	fying	straight
to	their	new	home,	usually	a	snug	cavity	in	a	tree	a	few	miles	away.
The	enchanting	story	of	house	hunting	by	honeybees	presents	us	with	two
intriguing	mysteries.	First,	how	can	a	bunch	of	tiny-brained	bees,	hanging	from	a
tree	branch,	make	such	a	complex	decision	and	make	it	well?	The	solution	to
this	first	mystery	will	be	revealed	in	chapters	
3
,	
4
,	
5
,	and	
6
.	Second,	how	can	a
swirl	
ing	ensemble	of	ten	thousand	airborne	bees	steer	themselves	and	stay
together	throughout	the	cross-country	flight	to	their	chosen	home,	a	journey
whose	destination	is	typically	a	small	knothole	in	an	inconspicuous	tree	in	a
remote	forest	corner?	The	solution	to	this	second	mystery	will	be	revealed	in
chapters	
7
	and	
8
.

===== PAGE 12 =====
We	will	see	that	the	1.5	kilograms	(3	pounds)	of	bees	in	a	honeybee	swarm,
just	like	the	1.5	kilograms	(3	pounds)	of	neurons	in	a	human	brain,	achieve	their
collective	wisdom	by	organizing	themselves	in	such	a	way	that	even	though	each
individual	has	limited	information	and	limited	intelligence,	the	group	as	a	whole
makes	first-rate	collective	decisions.	This	comparison	between	swarms	and
brains	might	seem	superfcial,	but	there	is	real	substance	here.	Over	the	last	two
decades,	while	other	sociobiologists	and	I	have	been	analyzing	the	behavioral
mechanisms	of	decision	making	by	insect	societies,	neurobiologists	have	been
investigating	the	neuronal	basis	of	decision	making	by	primate	brains.	It	turns
out	there	are	intriguing	similarities	in	the	pictures	that	have	emerged	from	these
two	independent	lines	of	study.	For	example,	the	studies	of	individual	neuron
activity	associated	with	the	eye-movement	decisions	in	monkey	brains	and	the
studies	of	individual	bee	activity	associated	with	nest-site	decisions	in	honeybee
swarms	have	both	found	that	the	decision-making	process	is	essentially	a
competition	between	alternatives	to	accumulate	support	(e.g.,	neuron	firings	and
bee	visits),	and	the	alternative	that	is	chosen	is	the	one	whose	accumulation	of
support	first	surpasses	a	critical	threshold.	Consistencies	like	these	suggest	that
there	are	general	principles	of	organization	for	building	groups	far	smarter	than
the	smartest	individuals	in	them.	We	will	explore	these	principles	in	
chapter	9
,
where	we	will	compare	the	decision-making	mechanisms	of	bee	swarms	and
primate	brains,	and	in	
chapter	10
,	where	we	will	review	the	lessons	that	have

===== PAGE 13 =====
been	learned	from	the	bees	about	how	to	structure	a	group	so	that	it	functions	as
a	smart	decision	maker.
Group	decisions	by	humans	are	widespread	and	important,	whether	they	are
small-scale	(e.g.,	agreements	made	among	friends	and	colleagues),	medium-
scale	(e.g.,	choices	made	in	democratic	town	meetings),	or	large-scale	decisions
(e.g.,	national	elections	or	international	agreements).	Not	surprisingly,	humans
have	puzzled	over	how	to	optimize	group	decision	making	for	millennia,	at	least
since	Plato’s	
The	Republic
	(360	BC)	and	no	doubt	long	before,	and	yet	many
questions	remain	open	about	how	humans	can	improve	social	choice.	In	
chapter
10
,	I	will	offer	some	suggestions,	what	I	call	“Swarm	Smarts”	because	they	have
been	learned	from	the	bees,	on	how	human	groups	can	organize	themselves	to
improve	their	decision	making.	The	American	essayist	Henry	David	Thoreau
expressed	skepticism	about	the	wisdom	of	crowds	when	he	wrote,	“The	mass
never	comes	up	to	the	standard	of	its	best	member,	but	on	the	contrary	degrades
itself	to	a	level	with	the	lowest.”	The	German	philosopher	Friedrich	Nietzsche
was	even	more	negative	about	group	intelligence	when	he	wrote,	“Madness	is
rare	in	individuals—but	in	groups…it	is	the	rule.”	Certainly	there	are	many
examples	of	groups	making	lousy	decisions—think	of	stock	market	bubbles	or
of	deadly	stampedes	from	burning	buildings—but	the	reality	of	honeybee
swarms	making	good	decisions	shows	us	that	there	really	are	ways	to	endow	a
group	with	a	high	collective	IQ.
Dancing	Bees
The	scientific	story	told	in	this	book	started	in	Germany	almost	seventy	years
ago,	in	the	summer	of	1944,	when	a	distinguished	professor	of	zoology	at	the
University	of	Munich,	Karl	von	Frisch,	made	a	revolutionary	discovery	for
which	he	would	eventually	receive	the	Nobel	Prize:	an	insect,	the	worker
honeybee,	can	inform	her	hive	mates	of	the	direction	and	distance	to	a	rich	food
source	by	means	of	dance	behavior.	Von	Frisch	had	already	known	for	nearly
thirty	years	that	when	a	lone	forager	finds	a	rich	source	of	nectar,	she	returns
excitedly	to	her	hive	and	performs	a	conspicuous	“waggle	dance.”	In	performing
this	eye-catching	behavior,	the	dancer	walks	straight	ahead	on	the	vertical
surface	of	a	comb,	waggling	her	body	from	side	to	side,	then	she	stops	the
“waggle	run”	and	turns	left	or	right	to	make	a	semicircular	“return	run”	back	to
her	starting	point,	whereupon	she	produces	another	waggle	run	followed	by
another	return	run,	and	so	on	(
fig.	1.3
).	Each	waggle	dance	consists,	therefore,	of
a	series	of	dance	circuits,	and	each	dance	circuit	contains	a	waggle	run	and	a

===== PAGE 14 =====
return	run.	Von	Frisch	also	knew	that	a	bee	may	continue	dancing	for	some
seconds	or	even	some	minutes,	all	the	while	trailed	by	unemployed	foragers	that,
in	his	own	words,	“take	part	in	each	of	her	manoeuvrings	so	that	the	dancer
herself,	in	her	madly	wheeling	movements,	appears	to	carry	behind	her	a
perpetual	comet’s	tail	of	bees.”	Furthermore,	he	knew	well	that	after	a	dance-
follower	has	tripped	along	behind	a	dancer	throughout	several	circuits	of	her
dance,	she	rushes	out	of	the	hive	to	search	for	the	bonanza	announced	by	the
dancing	bee.	But	before	1944,	von	Frisch	thought	that	the	only	thing	the	dance-
followers	learned	from	the	dancer	was	the	fragrance	of	the	flow-ers	she	had
visited—which	they	detected	by	holding	their	antennae	close	to	the	dancer	to
smell	the	floral	scents	adhering	to	her	body—and	that	upon	leaving	the	hive	the
newly	aroused	bees	simply	searched	in	ever-expanding	circles	until	they
discovered	flowers	with	the	memorized	fragrance.	What	von	Frisch	discovered
in	1944	was	nearly	incredible:	the	dance-followers	did	not	search	for	flowers
with	the	matching	scent	everywhere	around	the	hive,	but	only	in	the	vicinity	of
where	the	dancer	had	foraged,	even	if	she	had	foraged	in	a	remote	spot,	such	as
along	a	shady	lakeside	trail	far	from	the	hive.	Without	a	doubt,	the	newcomers
were	somehow	acquiring	from	the	successful	forager	information	about	food-
source	
location	as	well	as	food-source	scent.	Could	this	location	information	be
communicated	inside	the	hive,	by	means	of	the	bees’	dances?

===== PAGE 15 =====
The	answer	turned	out	to	be	a	defnitive	
yes
.	In	the	summer	of	1945,	amid	the
chaos	in	Europe	following	the	end	of	World	War	II,	von	Frisch	returned	to	his
dancing	bees,	now	observing	their	movements	more	closely	than	ever	before,
examining	them	for	clues	that	would	help	him	solve	his	mystery.	He	discovered
that	when	a	bee	performs	a	waggle	run	inside	a	dark	hive,	she	produces	a
miniaturized	reenactment	of	her	recent	flight	outside	the	hive	over	sunlit
countryside,	and	in	this	way	indicates	the	location	of	the	rich	food	source	she	has
just	visited	(
fig.	1.4
).	Her	encoding	of	the	information	about	food-source
location	works	as	
follows.	The	duration	of	the	waggle	run—made	conspicuous
despite	the	darkness	by	the	dancer	audibly	buzzing	her	wings	while	waggling	her
body—is	directly	proportional	to	the	length	of	the	outward	journey.	On	average,
one	second	of	the	combined	body-waggling/wing-buzzing	represents	some	1,000
meters	(six-tenths	of	a	mile)	of	flight.	And	the	angle	of	the	waggle	run,	relative
to	straight	up	on	the	vertical	comb,	represents	the	angle	of	the	outward	journey
relative	to	the	direction	of	the	sun.	Thus,	for	example,	if	a	successful	forager
walks	directly	upward	while	producing	a	waggle	run,	she	indicates	that	“the
feeding	place	is	in	the	same	direction	as	the	sun.”	Or,	if	the	waggling	bee	heads
40	degrees	to	the	right	of	vertical,	her	message	is,	“The	feeding	place	is	40
degrees	to	the	right	of	the	sun,”	as	shown	in	
figure	1.4
.	Perhaps	most

===== PAGE 16 =====
remarkably,	the	bees	that	follow	a	dancer,	monitoring	her	waggle	runs,	are	able
to	decode	her	dance	and	put	her	flight	instructions	into	action.
While	von	Frisch	was	deciphering	the	secret	message	of	the	waggle	dance,	he
was	also	supervising	a	young	graduate	student,	named	Martin	Lindauer,	who
was	to	prove	von	Frisch’s	most	gifted	disciple	in	revealing	the	inner	workings	of
honeybee	colonies	(
fig.	1.5
).	Lindauer	is	an	especially	important	figure	in	this
book,	for	he	pioneered	the	study	of	honeybee	democracy	as	practiced	in	a	bee
swarm	choosing	its	home.

===== PAGE 17 =====
Lindauer	was	born	in	a	tiny	village	in	the	foothills	of	the	Bavarian	Alps,	the
next	to	youngest	of	15	children	in	a	poor	farming	family.	Here	he	grew	up	close
to	nature—including	the	bees	in	his	father’s	hives—but	he	was	also	an
outstanding	student	and	won	a	scholarship	to	a	distinguished	boarding	school	in
Landshut,	Germany.	In	April	1939,	eight	days	after	his	high	school	graduation,
he	was	drafted	into	Hitler’s	Work	Service	to	dig	trenches,	and	six	months	later
he	was	transferred	to	the	army	and	assigned	to	an	antitank	unit.	In	July	1942,
during	fierce	flighting	on	the	Russian	front,	he	received	deep	shrapnel	wounds
from	an	exploding	
grenade.	This	proved	his	salvation.	He	was	removed	from	the
front,	but	the	other	156	men	in	his	company	went	on	to	the	battle	of	Stalingrad.
Only	three	returned	alive.
While	recovering	in	Munich,	Lindauer	was	recommended	by	his	physician	to
visit	the	university	and	attend	one	of	the	General	Zoology	lectures	delivered	by
the	famous	Professor	Karl	von	Frisch.	Lindauer	later	recalled	that	when	he	did,
and	saw	von	Frisch	talking	about	cell	division,	he	returned	to	“a	new	world	of
humanity,”	where	people	create	rather	than	destroy.	He	resolved	to	study
biology,	and	in	the	summer	of	1943,	after	being	discharged	from	the	army	as	a
severely	wounded	soldier,	he	began	university	studies	in	Munich.	Ultimately,	he
started	his	PhD	research	on	honeybees,	with	von	Frisch	his	advisor,	in	the	spring

===== PAGE 18 =====
of	1945.
Dirty	Dancers
Lindauer	had	a	knack	for	noticing	little	things	in	passing—some	curious
anomaly	or	surprising	behavioral	quirk—that	would	eventually	turn	out	to	be
important.	It	was	thanks	to	this	special	talent	that	Lindauer	embarked	on	his
studies	of	house	hunting	by	honeybees,	which	he	would	later	refer	to	as	“the
most	beautiful	experience”	in	his	scientifc	work.	It	all	began	on	a	spring
afternoon	in	1949,	when	Lindauer	was	walking	past	the	beehives	outside	the
Zoological	Institute,	and	he	spied	a	golden	mass	of	bees,	a	swarm,	hanging	on	a
bush.	Pausing	to	study	it,	he	noticed	several	bees	performing	waggle	dances	on
the	swarm’s	surface,	doing	so	with	their	usual	attention-grabbing	vigor,	but
instead	of	striding	across	a	beeswax	comb,	the	normal	dance	foor	for	bees,	these
dancers	were	walking	over	the	backs	of	other	bees.	Initially,	he	assumed	that
these	swarm	dancers	were	foragers	bringing	food	back	to	the	swarm,	because	all
the	dancing	bees	that	he	and	von	Frisch	had	studied	over	the	past	few	years	had
been	foragers	bringing	food	back	to	the	hive.	But	with	his	customary	patience	in
watching	the	bees,	Lindauer	lingered	by	the	swarm,	kept	observing	its	dancers,
and	gradually	realized	that	they	did	not	look	like	foragers,	for	unlike	pollen
foragers	they	never	carried	pollen	loads	and	unlike	nectar	foragers	they	never
regurgitated	droplets	of	nectar	to	adjacent	bees.	He	also	saw	something	odd:
many	of	the	dancers	arrived	at	the	swarm	dirty	and	dusty.	When	he	plucked
several	of	these	rather	grubby	bees	from	the	swarm	with	
forceps,	dusted	them	of
with	a	small	paintbrush,	and	examined	the	debris	under	a	microscope,	he	found
no	pollen	grains,	just	various	forms	of	dirt	particles.	“Black	with	soot,”	he
reported,	“red	with	brick	dust,	white	with	four,	or	gray	and	dusty	as	if	they	had
been	grubbing	a	hole	in	the	ground.”	Sniffing	the	bees	black	with	soot,	he	was
reminded	of	the	aroma	of	a	chimney	sweep.
Lindauer	concluded	that	these	dusty	and	dirty	dancers	were	certainly	not
foragers.	He	suspected	that	they	were	nest-site	scouts	who	had	discovered
potential	nesting	cavities	amid	the	rubble	of	bombed-out	Munich—an	unused
chimney	here,	a	cavity	in	some	collapsed	brick	wall	there,	or	even	a	forgotten
four	chest	in	an	abandoned	attic—and	were	indicating	the	locations	of	their
discoveries	by	performing	waggle	dances.	He	was	eager	to	test	this	hunch	by
making	further	observations	of	swarm	bees,	but	in	1949,	with	Germany’s
economy	still	in	shambles	and	von	Frisch’s	laboratory	short	of	bees,	von	Frisch
directed	the	institute’s	beekeeper	to	promptly	hive	all	swarms,	lest	the	bees	be

===== PAGE 19 =====
lost.	This	meant	that	the	bees’	house-hunting	process	was	cut	short.	And	so,	for
the	time	being,	Lindauer’s	study	of	the	house-hunting	process	was	also	cut	short.
But	he	persisted	in	seeking	approval	to	leave	some	swarms	alone	so	he	could
study	their	dancing	bees,	and	two	summers	later,	in	1951,	von	Frisch	granted
Lindauer	permission	to	study	as	he	wished	all	the	swarms	from	the	beehives	kept
in	the	garden	of	the	Zoological	Institute	in	Munich.
Later,	in	
chapters	3
	to	
6
,	we	will	review	in	detail	the	intriguing	story	of
democratic	decision	making	by	honeybees	that	Lindauer	started	piecing	together
in	1951.	For	now,	we	will	consider	only	how	he	tested	his	hypothesis	that	the
bees	performing	dances	on	a	swarm	are	nest-site	scouts	advertising	potential
homes.	In	the	summer	of	1951,	he	examined	the	dances	on	nine	swarms.	Sitting
patiently	beside	each	swarm	for	hours	and	days	on	end,	he	labeled	each	dancing
bee	with	a	paint	dot	when	she	began	her	dancing,	and	he	noted	the	direction	and
distance	of	the	site	indicated	by	her	first	dance.	(Lindauer	reasonably	assumed
that	his	swarming	bees	were	encoding	distance	and	direction	information	in	their
dances	in	exactly	the	same	way	as	von	Frisch	had	found	for	his	foraging	bees.)
These	swarm-side	vigils	led	Lindauer	to	a	surprising	finding:	when	dancers
started	to	appear	on	a	swarm,	they	announced	a	dozen	or	more	widely	separated
locations,	but	after	a	few	hours	or	a	few	days,	they	began	to	announce	one
location	in	in	
creasing	numbers.	Ultimately,	during	the	last	hour	or	so	before	the
swarm	took	of	to	fly	to	its	new	home,	the	bees	dancing	on	the	swarm	all
indicated	just	one	distance	and	direction.	Lindauer	reasoned	that	if	the	bees
dancing	on	a	swarm	had	been	searching	for	nest	sites,	and	if	they	were
performing	dances	to	advertise	their	finds,	then	the	location	they	were	indicating
unanimously	in	the	end	should	correspond	to	the	location	of	the	swarm’s	new
residence.	To	test	this	prediction,	he	tried	to	follow	each	swarm	when	it	few	to
its	new	home,	by	sprinting	down	Munich’s	streets	and	alleys	beneath	the
airborne	swarm	(
fig.	1.6
).	Three	times	he	succeeded!	And	in	each	case	the	spot
indicated	by	the	bees’	closing	dances	matched	the	address	of	their	new	dwelling
place.	So,	sure	enough,	Lindauer’s	dirty	dancers	really	were	house	hunters.

===== PAGE 20 =====
Catching	the	Buzz
In	June	1952,	when	Lindauer	was	busy	in	his	second	summer	of	swarm	watching
in	Munich,	I	was	born	some	6,500	kilometers	(4,000	miles)	away,	in	a	little	town
in	Pennsylvania.	A	few	years	later,	my	family	moved	to	Ithaca,	New	York,	which
has	been	basically	my	hometown	ever	since.	While	growing	up	in	Ellis	Hollow,
a	rural	community	a	few	miles	east	of	Ithaca,	I	spent	much	time	alone	exploring
the	wild	areas	around	our	home:	shady	hardwood	forests	on	the	steep	hillsides,
sunlit	abandoned	fields	where	the	land	slopes	gently,	and	winding	Cas-cadilla
Creek	connecting	broad	swamps	in	the	valley	bottom.	My	favorite	find	was
about	a	mile	from	home	down	a	dirt	road	that	led	to	an	old	farmhouse.	Here,	in	a
sunny	spot	beside	a	field	of	goldenrod,	I	discovered	two	wooden	hives	of	bees
that	belonged	to	a	beekeeper.	I	loved	visiting	these	hives.	Sitting	beside	one,	I
could	see	bees	landing	heavily	at	the	entrance	with	loads	of	brightly	colored
pollen,	I	could	hear	the	hum	of	bees	fanning	their	wings	to	ventilate	their	nest,
and	I	could	smell	the	aroma	of	ripening	honey.	That	thousands	of	insects	could

===== PAGE 21 =====
live	together	so	densely	and	harmoniously,	and	could	build	delicate	wax	combs
filled	with	delicious	honey,	was	an	almost	miraculous	wonder	that	left	a	deep
impression.	No	less	impressive	was	what	I	saw	when	I	lay	in	the	tall	grass	beside
these	hives:	thousands	of	humming	bees	crisscrossing	the	blue	summer	sky	like
shooting	stars.
It	was	not	until	high	school—when	my	peers	seemed	interested	mostly	in
sports,	motorcycles,	and	girls—that	I	became	utterly	spellbound	by	the	bees.	I’d
had	a	deep	curiosity	about	honeybees	ever	since	a	beekeeper	made	a	show-and-
tell	visit	to	my	third	grade	class	in	elementary	school,	and	I	had	especially
enjoyed	earning	an	Insect	Study	merit	badge	as	a	Boy	Scout	in	junior	high
school.	I	had	even	daydreamed	from	time	to	time	about	ordering	a	hive	and
some	bees	from	the	Sears	catalog	and	taking	up	beekeeping.	But	I	didn’t	really
catch	the	buzz	until	the	summer	day	in	1969	when	I	found	a	swarm	hanging
from	a	tree	branch,	
quickly	nailed	together	some	boards	to	make	a	crude	hive,
shook	the	bees	into	my	hive,	and	brought	them	home.	Now	I	had	these	little
sparks	of	wonderment	living	in	a	box	that	I	could	gently	open	to	watch	them
closely,	and	I	did	so	for	several	hours	each	day	after	work,	mesmerized	by	the
intricate	behaviors	of	the	individual	bees	and	by	the	peace	of	their	great
community.
In	the	fall	of	1970,	when	I	began	my	freshman	year	at	Dartmouth	College,	I
hadn’t	yet	realized	that	studying	bees	could	be	serious	business,	and	I	aimed	to
become	a	physician	who	would	do	beekeeping	as	a	hobby.	But	the	allure	of	the
bees	grew	stronger	and	stronger.	I	made	bees	or	beekeeping	the	subject	of	nearly
every	college	writing	assignment.	I	chose	chemistry	as	my	major	area	of	study
so	that	I	could	become	a	cryptographer	of	the	chemical	(pheromonal)	language
of	bees,	which	was	just	starting	to	be	deciphered.	And	I	returned	each	summer	to
Ithaca	so	that	I	could	work	at	the	Dyce	Laboratory	for	Honey	Bee	Studies	at
Cornell.	The	director	of	this	lab,	Roger	A.	Morse	(“Doc”),	understood	my
passion	for	the	bees	and	advised	me	to	give	graduate	school	some	thought.
During	my	last	two	years	at	Dartmouth,	I	gradually	became	aware	that	my
interests	in	entomology	had	eclipsed	those	in	medicine,	so	even	though	I	applied
to	and	was	accepted	by	three	medical	schools,	I	was	thrilled	when	I	was
accepted	at	Harvard	to	pursue	graduate	studies	with	the	noted	insect	sociologist
Edward	O.	Wilson,	whose	1971	book	
The	 Insect	 Societies
	had	made	an
enormous	impression	on	me.
When	I	arrived	at	Harvard	in	the	fall	of	1974,	I	had	the	good	fortune	of	being
assigned	to	Bert	Hölldobler,	a	brilliant	investigator	of	ant	behavior	and	a	young

===== PAGE 22 =====
man	of	immense	personal	appeal,	for	my	provisional	thesis	advisor.	Bert	had
recently	moved	from	the	University	of	Frankfurt,	Germany.	He	had	been	hired
by	Harvard	as	a	full	professor	to	seed	the	university	with	the	Karl	von	Frisch
approach	to	animal	behavior	study:	close	behavioral	observations	of	animals
living	in	nature	combined	with	incisive	experimental	investigations	on	the
mechanisms	underlying	their	behavior.	In	Germany,	Bert	had	studied	under
Martin	Lindauer,	so	he	knew	the	bees	as	well	as	the	ants,	his	own	first	love.	He
supported	my	beeophilia,	and	we	were	quick	to	become	friends.
Bert	Hölldobler’	s	connection	with	Martin	Lindauer	was	important	to	me
because	I	knew	that	I	wanted	my	PhD	thesis	research	to	deepen	Lindauer’	s
investigations	of	how	a	honeybee	colony	works	as	unit,	a	kind	of	superorganism.
I	
was	especially	keen	to	analyze	in	greater	detail	the	decision-making	process	of
a	honeybee	swarm.	Back	at	Dartmouth,	I	had	read	Lindauer’s	little	book,
Communication	 among	 Social	 Bees
,	and	had	been	especially	intrigued	by
chapter	2
,	titled	“Communication	by	Dancing	in	Swarm	Bees,”	in	which	he
summarized	his	studies	of	how	a	swarm	chooses	its	home.	Indeed,	I	was	so
fascinated	that	I	tracked	down	Lindauer’s	full	report	on	this	work,	a	62-page
paper,	all	in	German,	titled	“Schwarmbienen	auf	Wohnungssuche”	(Swarm	bees
out	house	hunting).	There	was	just	one	problem,	I	could	not	read	German.	My
solution	was	to	enroll	in	an	introductory	German	course	at	Dartmouth,	buy	a
German-English	dictionary,	make	a	Xerox	copy	of	Lindauer’s	paper,	and
patiently	decipher	Lindauer’s	big	paper.	(I	penciled	in	the	paper’s	margins	the
meaning	of	every	new	German	word	and	this	densely	annotated	copy,	now	38
years	old,	is	a	prize	part	of	my	reprint	collection.)	In	poring	over	this	paper,	I
began	to	realize	that	Lindauer’s	pioneering	investigation	of	the	swarm	bees’
process	of	collective	decision	making	provided	just	a	preliminary	understanding
of	the	subject,	and	that	it,	like	all	good	scientific	
studies,	raised	many	more
questions	than	it	answered.	I	was	also	amazed—and	I	confess	delighted—that
during	the	nearly	20	years	since	Lindauer	had	published	his	work	in	1955,	no
one	had	pressed	the	investigation	more	deeply.	I	resolved	to	do	so,	starting	with
my	PhD	thesis	research	(
fig.	1.7
).

===== PAGE 23 =====
This	book	aims	to	present	to	biologists	and	general	readers	what	was	learned
by	Lindauer	in	the	1950s,	and	by	myself	and	others	since	the	1970s,	about	how
the	workers	in	a	honeybee	swarm	conduct	a	democratic	decision-making	process
to	make	the	life-or-death	choice	of	where	to	build	their	new	home.	This	work	has
revealed	how	the	process	of	evolution	by	natural	selection,	operating	over
millions	of	years,	has	shaped	the	behavior	of	bees	so	that	they	coalesce	into	a
single	collective	intelligence.	This	story	about	the	bees	also	provides	useful
guidelines	to	human	groups	whose	members	share	common	interests	and	want	to
make	good	group	decisions.	Mainly,	though,	this	book	tries	to	be	a	window	into
the	private	world	of	a	honeybee	colony.	If	it	bolsters,	in	any	way,	an	appreciation
of	these	little	creatures	for	the	beauty	of	their	social	behavior,	along	with	their
service	in	keeping	the	world	flowering	and	fruitful,	then	it	will	have	achieved	its
purpose.

===== PAGE 24 =====
2
LIFE	IN	A	HONEYBEE	COLONY
…this	being	an	Amazonian
or	feminine	kingdom.
—Charles	Butler
,	The	Feminine	Monarchie,
	1609
	
	
T
he	honeybee,	
Apis	mellifera
,	is	just	one	of	nearly	20,000	species	of	bees	that
exist	worldwide.	They	are	a	surprisingly	diverse	lot—some	are	smaller	than	a
rice	grain,	while	others	will	half	fill	a	teacup—but	they	are	all	descended	from
one	ancestral	species	of	vegetarian	wasp	that	lived	approximately	100	million
years	ago,	in	the	Early	Cretaceous	period,	when	huge	dinosaurs	were	still
stomping	about	and	flowering	plants	were	just	starting	to	appear.	Even	today,
many	bee	species	are	remarkably	wasplike	in	appearance,	but	behaviorally	the
two	groups	are	distinct.	Nearly	all	wasps,	including	the	familiar	paper	wasps	and
yellow	jackets,	are	predators	that	kill	other	insects	or	spiders	(often	by	stinging)
to	provide	the	egg-laying	females	and	their	growing	young	with	proteinaceous
food.	Bees,	however,	have	abandoned	the	carnivorous	behavior	of	their	ancestors
and	depend	instead	on	collecting	protein-rich	pollen	from	flowers.	This
pollenivo-rous	habit	explains	the	decidedly	fuzzy,	almost	teddy-bearish,	look	of
many	bees;	their	bodies	are	thickly	covered	with	plumose	hairs	that	effciently
catch	pollen	grains	when	a	bee	scrabbles	through	a	flower.
Both	bees	and	wasps	regularly	visit	flowers,	for	both	types	of	insects	feed	on
sugary	nectar	for	energy,	but	it	is	between	the	pollen-loving	bees	and	the
flowering	plants	that	a	strong	mutual	dependence	has	evolved	over	the	millions
of	
years	since	both	groups	arose.	These	days,	the	two	are	made	for	each	other.
Bees	depend	on	flowers	for	adequate	nourishment,	while	many	flowering	plants
depend	on	bees	for	sexual	reproduction.	Bees,	with	their	hairy	bodies	and
fixation	on	flowers	as	protein	sources,	serve	as	flying	penises	for	the	plants,

===== PAGE 25 =====
picking	up	pollen	grains	from	the	bursting	anthers	of	one	flower	and	depositing
them	on	the	sticky	stigma	of	another.	Introducing	a	hive	of	honeybees	to	any
flowering	area—garden,	orchard,	blooming	wayside,	or	prairie—brings	to	the
neighborhood,	in	effect,	a	large,	dawn-to-dusk	“escort”	service	of	the	fowers’
little	friends.
Honeybees	are	unusual	bees	in	that	they	live	in	teeming	societies	whose
massive	nests	of	honeycomb	fill	the	boxy	hives	of	beekeepers	or,	as	we	shall	see,
suitably	spacious	cavities	in	hollow	trees.	In	most	bee	species,	by	contrast,
individuals	live	in	solitude	and	build	small	nests	in	narrow	tunnels	excavated
inside	plant	stems	or	in	sandy	soil.	The	typical	life	history	of	one	of	these
solitary	bee	species	starts	in	late	spring	or	early	summer	when	a	mated	female
emerges	from	an	overwintering	burrow	(the	males	having	died	of	the	previous
fall).	 Over	 the	 next	 few	 weeks,	 this	 motherly	 bee	 will	 excavate	 a
multichambered	nest,	provision	each	chamber	with	a	sticky	ball	of	pollen
moistened	with	nectar,	lay	one	whitish	egg	atop	each	pollen	ball,	seal	up	each
chamber,	and	then	leave	her	offspring	to	eat	their	way	to	adulthood	later	that
summer.	She	will	die	long	before	her	offspring	emerge	as	adults,	mate	with	one
another,	and	prepare	for	the	coming	winter.	Clearly,	most	bees	are	loners.
A	Composite	Being
When	we	look	through	the	glass	walls	of	a	honeybee	observation	hive,	or	gently
lift	the	lid	from	a	conventional	beehive	and	peer	inside,	we	see	the	opposite	of
loner	bees:	thousands	and	thousands	of	bees	living	together.	Virtually	all	are
female	worker	bees,	all	of	whom	are	daughters	of	the	one	queen	bee	that	lives	in
their	midst.	Even	though	these	workers	are	females	and	are	fully	equipped	to
care	for	offspring,	they	have	poorly	developed	ovaries	and	they	rarely	lay	any
eggs.	If	we	proceed	to	search	the	combs	of	the	hive	carefully,	we	will	eventually
locate	the	queen,	who	resembles	the	workers	but	is	a	bit	bigger,	with	a	longer
abdomen	and	longer	legs	(
fig.	2.1
).	Her	greater	size	is	impressive,	but	what	most
renders	her	conspicuous	is	how	she	moves	slowly,	indeed	majestically,	across	the
combs	and	how	she	is	treated	by	her	worker	daughters.	As	the	queen	advances,
the	workers	before	her	step	back	to	clear	her	path,	and	when	she	pauses,	the
dozen	or	so	workers	beside	her	gingerly	step	forward	to	feed	and	groom	her,
forming	a	retinue	of	nudging	bees	that	encircles	her	completely.	In	contrast	to
the	workers,	the	queen	is	an	amazing	layer	of	eggs,	depositing	them	in	cells	at	a
rate	of	one	or	more	per	minute,	or	more	than	1,500	per	day	(with	a	combined
weight	nearly	equal	to	her	own)	in	late	spring	and	early	summer,	when	a

===== PAGE 26 =====
colony’s	brood	rearing	is	at	its	peak	(
fig.	2.2
).	Over	an	entire	summer,	a	colony’s
queen	will	produce	some	150,000	eggs,	hence	about	half	a	million	during	the
two	or	three	years	of	her	likely	lifespan.
Most	of	the	pearly	white	eggs	the	queen	lays	will	be	fertilized,	but	some	will
be	unfertilized.	During	the	first	week	of	her	life,	she	few	from	her	colony’s	hive
and	mated	with	10	to	20	males	from	other	hives	in	the	area,	and	so	procured	a

===== PAGE 27 =====
lifetime	supply	of	approximately	five	million	sperm.	The	queen	stores	all	these
sperm	in	suspended	animation	inside	a	spherical	organ	called	a	spermatheca,
which	lies	in	the	rear	of	her	abdomen,	behind	her	massive	ovaries.	With	each	egg
she	lays,	the	queen	decides	whether	to	dispense	a	few	fertilizing	sperm	or	to	hold
them	back,	and	in	this	way	she	determines	the	sex	of	her	offspring:	fertilized	for
female,	unfertilized	for	male.	Whether	a	fertilized	egg	develops	into	a	nonbreed-
ing	worker	or	an	egg-laying	queen	depends	on	how	it	is	treated.	If	it	is	deposited
in	a	standard-size	cell	in	the	combs,	where	after	hatching	into	a	larva	it	will	be
fed	by	the	workers	with	standard-quality	larval	food,	then	it	will	develop	into	a
worker.	But	if	a	fertilized	egg	is	deposited	in	a	large,	specially	built	queen	cell,
hanging	from	the	bottom	of	a	comb,	then	the	larva	it	gives	rise	to	will	be	fed	a
lavish	diet	of	nutrient-rich	secretions	(so-called	royal	jelly),	and	its	development
will	be	channeled	to	a	developmental	pathway	that	produces	a	queen.	For	the
fertilized	eggs	of	bees,	food	is	destiny.
A	queen	withholds	sperm	from	less	than	5	percent	of	her	eggs,	but	these
unfertilized	eggs	are	important	for	they	give	rise	to	her	sons,	the	colony’s	drones
(
fig.	2.3
).	These	are	a	colony’s	brawniest	bees,	endowed	with	huge	eyes	for
spying	young	queens	out	on	nuptial	fights	and	massive	flight	muscles	for
chasing	after	the	queens	at	speeds	up	to	35	kilometers	an	hour	(about	22	miles
per	hour).	They	are	also	a	colony’s	laziest	bees.	Unlike	the	workers	who	perform
all	the	household	tasks	inside	their	hive—clean	cells,	feed	larvae,	build	combs,
ripen	honey,	ventilate	hive,	guard	entrance,	etc.—the	drones	spend	their	time	at
home	simply	hanging	out	in	restful	leisure,	from	time	to	time	helping	themselves
to	meals	from	the	colony’s	honey	reserves	or	begging	feedings	from	their
worker-sisters.	Nevertheless,	they	make	a	fundamentally	important	contribution
to	their	colony’s	success,	for	in	mating	with	the	young	queens	of	the	neighboring
colonies	they	help	their	colony	win	in	the	ceaseless	evolutionary	competition	to
pass	genes	on	to	future	generations.	And	when	it	comes	to	seeking	sex,	drone
honeybees	are	no	slackers.	Every	sunny	afternoon,	once	a	drone	reaches	sexual
maturity	at	about	12	days	of	age,	he	will	fly	from	his	hive	looking	for	action.	In
ways	that	remain	mysterious,	he	will	find	his	way	to	one	of	the	traditional
honeybee	mating	areas	(“drone	congregation	areas”)	within	a	few	miles	of	his
home,	and	will	fly	about	this	aerial	pickup	spot,	waiting	for	a	young	queen	to
appear.	If	one	does,	he	will	zoom	after	her.	And	if	he	manages	to	outrace	his
rivals	and	contact	the	queen,	he	will	inseminate	her	in	flight,	10	to	20	meters	(30
to	60	feet)	up	in	the	sky.	If	he	doesn’t	make	contact,	he’ll	fly	home,	rest	and
refuel,	and	come	out	later	to	try	his	luck	again.

===== PAGE 28 =====
One	way	to	think	of	a	honeybee	colony	is,	then,	as	a	society	of	many
thousands	of	individuals:	the	queen,	workers,	and	drones	just	discussed.	But	to
understand	the	distinctive	biology	of	this	species	of	bee,	it	is	often	helpful	to
think	of	a	colony	in	a	slightly	different	way,	not	just	as	thousands	of	separate
bees	but	also	as	a	single	living	entity	that	functions	as	a	unified	whole	(
fig.	2.4
).
In	other	words,	it	can	help	to	think	of	a	honeybee	colony	as	a	superorganism.
Just	as	a	human	body	functions	as	a	single	integrated	unit	even	though	it	is	a
multitude	of	cells,	the	superorgan-ism	of	a	honeybee	colony	operates	as	a	single
coherent	whole	even	though	it	is	a	multitude	of	bees.	The	fact	that	both
perspectives—colony	as	superorganism	
and
	colony	as	society—are	valid	refects
the	way	in	which	evolution	has	repeatedly	built	higher-level	units	of	biological
organization:	by	assembling	unified	societies	of	lower-level	units.	For	example,
during	the	origins	of	multicellular	organisms,	natural	selection	favored	some
societies	of	cells	whose	members	cooperated	rather	than	competed.	Bit	by	bit,
this	selection	for	close	cooperation	produced	the	thoroughly	integrated	societies
of	cells	that	we	know	today,	for	example,	as	hummingbirds	and	human	beings.
The	same	sort	of	selection	for	extreme	cooperation	also	happened	with	some
societies	of	animals	to	produce	the	thoroughly	harmonious,	smoothly	running
insect	societies	that	we	can	call	superorganisms.	These	include	not	just	colonies
of	honeybees	but	also	the	gigantic	colonies	of	leafcutter	ants,	driver	ants,	or
fungus-growing	termites.
A	colony	of	honeybees	is,	then,	far	more	than	an	aggregation	of	individuals,	it
is	a	composite	being	that	functions	as	an	integrated	whole.	Indeed,	one	can
accurately	think	of	a	honeybee	colony	as	a	single	living	entity,	weighing	as	much

===== PAGE 29 =====
as	5	kilograms	(10	pounds)	and	performing	all	of	the	basic	physiological
processes	that	support	life:	ingesting	and	digesting	food,	maintaining	nutritional
balance,	circulating	resources,	exchanging	respiratory	gases,	regulating	water
content,	controlling	body	temperature,	sensing	the	environment,	deciding	how	to
behave,	and	achieving	locomotion.	Consider,	for	example,	the	control	of	body
(colony)	temperature	(
fig.	2.5
).	From	late	winter	to	early	fall,	when	the	workers
are	rearing	brood,	a	colony’s	internal	temperature	is	kept	between	34°	and	36°C
(93°	and	96°F)—just	below	the	core	body	temperature	of	humans—even	as	the
ambient	air	temperature	ranges	from	-30°	to	50°C	(-20°	to	120°F).	The	colony
accomplishes	this	by	adjusting	the	rate	at	which	it	sheds	the	heat	generated	by	its
resting	metabolism	and,	in	times	of	extreme	cold,	by	boosting	its	metabolism	to
intensify	its	heat	production.	A	colony’s	metabolism	is	fueled	by	the	honey	it	has
stored	in	its	hive.	Other	indicators	of	the	high	functional	integration	of	a
honeybee	colony	include	
colonial	 breathing:
	limiting	the	buildup	of	the
respiratory	gas	CO
2
	inside	the	hive	by	increasing	its	ventilation	when	the	CO
2
level	reaches	1–2	percent;	
colonial	circulation:
	keeping	the	heat-producing	bees
in	the	central,	brood-nest	region	of	the	hive	properly	fueled	with	honey	carried	in
from	peripheral	honey	combs;	and	
colonial	fever	response:
	mounting	a	disease-
fighting	elevation	of	the	nest	temperature	when	a	colony	suffers	a	dangerous
fungal	infection	of	the	brood	bees.	I	suggest,	though,	that	the	single	best
demonstration	of	the	superorganismic	nature	of	a	honeybee	colony	is	the	ability
of	a	honeybee	swarm	to	function	as	an	intelligent	decision-making	unit	when
choosing	its	new	home.

===== PAGE 30 =====
Unique	Annual	Cycle

===== PAGE 31 =====
The	key	to	understanding	why	honeybee	swarms	are	meticulous	in	the	choice	of
their	living	quarters	is	the	unique	annual	cycle	of	the	honeybee,	which	depends
critically	on	colonies	occupying	nesting	cavities	that	are	both	snug	and	roomy.
Unlike	all	the	other	social	insect	species	that	live	in	cold	climates,	honeybees	do
not	survive	winter	in	dormancy,	but	as	fully	functioning	colonies	in	self-heated
nests.	To	achieve	this	means	of	winter	survival,	each	colony	contracts	in	winter
into	a	tight,	well-insulated	cluster	of	bees	about	the	size	of	a	basketball.	The
cluster’s	surface	temperature	is	maintained	above	10°C	(50°F),	which	is	a	few
degrees	above	a	worker	bee’s	chill-coma	threshold,	and	so	is	warm	enough	to
keep	the	outermost	bees	alive	(
fig.	2.6
).	Heat	is	generated	within	the	cluster	by
the	bees	isometrically	contracting	their	two	sets	of	flight	muscles	(one	for
elevating	the	wings	and	one	for	depressing	them)	thereby	producing	much	heat
but	few	or	no	wing	vibrations.	These	flight	muscles	endow	a	bee	with	a
surprisingly	powerful	means	of	heat	production.	Bees	fly,	of	course,	by	flapping
their	wings—the	most	energetically	demanding	mode	of	animal	locomotion—
and	the	flight	muscles	of	insects	are	among	the	most	metabolically	active	of
tissues.	Indeed,	a	flying	bee	expends	energy	at	a	rate	of	about	500	watts	per
kilogram	(250	watts	per	pound),	whereas	the	maximum	power	output	of	an
Olympic	rowing	crew	is	only	about	20	watts	per	kilogram	(10	watts	per	pound).
At	any	moment,	however,	only	a	small	portion	of	the	clustered	bees	will	be
shivering	with	maximum	intensity,	so	the	total	heat	output	by	the	approximately
two	kilograms	(four	pounds)	of	bees	in	a	winter	cluster	isn’t	1,000	watts,	but	is
only	about	40	watts,	a	rate	of	heat	production	like	that	of	a	small	incandescent
light	bulb.	In	a	snug	cavity,	sheltered	from	heat-robbing	winds,	a	colony	with
this	level	of	heat	output	will	survive	the	winter	quite	nicely.	The	importance	of
inhabiting	a	protective	cavity	is	demonstrated	by	the	sad	fate	of	the	occasional
colony	that	fails	to	find	shelter	and	nests	in	the	open	(
fig.	2.7
);	almost	certainly,
it	will	perish	when	winter’s	cold	arrives.

===== PAGE 32 =====
A	honeybee	colony	runs	year-round	on	flower	power,	for	what	fuels	a
colony’s	heat	production	all	winter	long	is	the	20	or	more	kilograms	(44+
pounds)	of	honey	that	the	colony	stockpiled	in	its	honeycombs	over	the	previous
summer.	If	one	mounts	a	hive	of	bees	on	scales	and	takes	a	weight	reading	each
day	for	an	entire	year,	one	will	see	that	winter	is	a	time	of	steady	weight	losses
as	a	colony	consumes	its	honey	stores,	and	that	summer	is	a	time	of	episodic
weight	gains	as	a	colony	scrambles	to	replenish	these	stores	(
fig.	2.8
).	For
example,	in	Ithaca,	New	York,	my	colonies	restock	their	honeycombs	mainly

===== PAGE 33 =====
during	the	60-day	period	between	May	15	and	July	15,	when	there	unfolds	a
succession	of	mass	flower-ings	by	plants	that	produce	copious	nectar,	including
black	locust	and	basswood	trees,	sumac	shrubs,	and	various	herbaceous	plants
such	as	dandelions,	raspberries,	milkweeds,	and	clover.	On	a	day	when	the	air	is
warm,	the	sun	is	strong,	and	nectar	is	flush,	the	hive	that	I	keep	at	home	on	a	set
of	platform	scales	will	grow	heavier	by	several	kilograms,	virtually	all	of	it	fresh
honey.	Beekeepers	call	a	string	of	such	days	a	“honey	flow.”
The	task	of	amassing	within	a	short	summer	season	an	ample	supply	of	winter
heating	fuel	is	one	of	the	greatest	problems	faced	by	a	honeybee	colony.	Honey
is	a	dense,	energy-rich	food,	but	even	so,	20	kilograms	(44	pounds)	of	the	stuff
will	nearly	fill	a	16-liter	(14-quart)	bucket,	or	more	than	50	of	those	plastic
honey	bears	one	sees	lined	up	beside	the	grape	jelly	at	the	supermarket.	How
much	work	effort	and	storage	space	is	needed	to	create	such	a	bulky	hoard	of
calories?	Regarding	work	effort,	given	that	freshly	collected	nectar	is	(on
average)	a	40	percent	sugar	solution	and	fully	ripened	honey	is	roughly	an	80
percent	sugar	
solution,	and	given	that	a	foraging	bee	typically	brings	home	a
nectar	load	weighing	about	40	milligrams	(0.001	ounces),	we	can	calculate	that
the	collection	of	enough	nectar	to	produce	20	kilograms	(44	pounds)	of	honey
requires	more	than	1	million	foraging	trips	by	a	colony’s	workers.	And	when	one
also	considers	the	miles	flown	and	countless	blossoms	visited	on	each	foraging

===== PAGE 34 =====
trip,	one	realizes	what	prodigious	efforts	the	bees	make	over	summer	to	sustain
their	colony	through	winter.
Regarding	storage	space,	given	that	it	takes	250	square	centimeters	of
honeycomb	to	store	one	kilogram	of	honey	(i.e.,	18	square	inches	of	comb	per
pound	of	honey),	and	given	that	every	250	square	centimeters	of	honeycomb
require	about	0.9	liters	of	nest	cavity	space	(to	accommodate	the	honey-filled
comb	and	the	adjacent	passageways	for	the	bees),	we	can	calculate	that	the
storage	of	20	kilograms	(44	pounds)	of	honey	requires	a	nesting	cavity	of	at	least
some	18	liters	(4	gallons).	Thus	we	can	see	that	when	a	colony	chooses	its	future
homesite,	it	will	need	to	reject	tree	cavities	smaller	than	these	volumes.	Ideally,
it	will	find	a	nesting	cavity	somewhat	roomier	still,	to	accommodate	extra
honey-filled	combs	and	still	more	combs	for	the	colony’s	brood	rearing
operation,	which	in	spring	can	fill	more	than	half	the	cells	in	a	colony’s	nest	as
the	colony	rebuilds	its	workforce	in	preparation	for	swarming.	Beekeepers,	by
the	way,	have	found	a	clever	way	to	exploit	the	bees’	drive	to	fill	their	nests	with
honey.	By	housing	their	colonies	in	hives	that	provide	vastly	more	nesting	space
—about	160	liters	(some	36	gallons)—than	is	needed	by	bees	living	in	nature,
beekeepers	induce	their	colonies	to	amass	astonishing	amounts	of	honey,
sometimes	more	than	100	kilograms	(220	pounds)	of	honey	per	hive	in	a
summer.	Thus	a	colony	of	hardworking	bees	residing	in	a	beekeeper’s	hive	will
often	provide	its	landlord	with	dozens	of	combs	brimming	with	honey.
The	 honeybee’s	 annual	 cycle	 is	 unique	 in	 other	 ways	 besides	 the
overwintering	process.	Consider	how	a	colony	starts	rebuilding	its	workforce	in
the	middle	of	winter.	Shortly	after	the	winter	solstice,	when	the	days	begin	to
grow	longer	but	snow	still	blankets	the	countryside,	each	honeybee	colony	raises
the	core	temperature	of	its	winter	cluster	to	about	35°C	(95°F),	the	optimum
temperature	for	rearing	new	bees.	With	the	cluster’s	core	now	serving	as	a	cozy
incubator,	the	queen	begins	to	lay	eggs,	using	cells	that	were	emptied	of	their
honey	during	the	preceding	weeks	of	cold.	Larvae	hatch	from	these	eggs,
approximately	three	days	after	they	were	laid,	and	are	fed	by	the	adult	workers.
At	first,	the	workers	feed	the	larvae	a	proteinaceous	food	secreted	by	glands
located	in	their	(the	adult	bees’)	heads,	but	after	about	three	days	they	wean
them	to	a	mixture	of	honey	and	pollen.	About	ten	days	after	hatching	from	its
egg,	each	larva	has	grown	to	nearly	fill	its	cell	(
fig.	2.9
)	and	starts	to	spin	the
cocoon	in	which	it	will	metamorphose	into	an	adult	bee.	The	adult	workers	build
a	wax	capping	over	the	cell	to	protect	the	immature	bee	during	this	delicate,
pupal	stage	of	development.	Once	metamorphosis	is	complete,	in	about	another
week,	the	fully	developed	worker	bee	chews	through	the	capping	on	her	cell	and

===== PAGE 35 =====
joins	her	colony’s	growing	workforce.	When	a	colony	starts	its	impressive
performance	of	rearing	brood	in	the	middle	of	winter,	there	are	only	a	hundred	or
so	cells	containing	developing	bees,	but	by	early	spring,	when	the	first	flowers
blossom,	over	one	thousand	cells	hold	developing	bees,	and	the	pace	of	colony
growth	quickens	daily.	Come	late	spring,	when	most	other	insects	are	just
starting	to	become	active,	honeybee	colonies	have	already	grown	to	full	size,
twenty	or	thirty	thousand	individuals,	and	have	begun	to	reproduce.
Colony	Reproduction
Reproduction	by	a	honeybee	colony	is	a	curiously	complex	affair,	for	each
colony	is	a	hermaphrodite,	meaning	that	it	has	both	male	and	female
reproductive	powers.	This	is	decidedly	different	from	ourselves	and	most	other
animals,	where	each	individual	is	either	a	male	or	a	female,	but	it	is	strikingly
similar	to	many	plants,	such	as	apple	trees.	In	fact,	to	make	sense	of	how	a
honeybee	colony	reproduces,	I	find	it	helpful	to	compare	how	honeybee	colonies
and	apple	trees	go	about	achieving	sexual	reproduction.	Their	basic	similarity	is
that	both	types	of	individual—colony	and	tree—produce	both	male	and	female
reproductive	propagules.	The	male	propagules	are	drone	bees	and	pollen	grains,
whereas	the	female	propagules	are	queen	bees	and	egg	cells.	And	just	as	the
pollen	grains	from	one	apple	tree	fertilize	the	egg	cells	of	other	trees	to	create
embryos	inside	seeds	that	will	grow	into	new	trees,	the	drones	from	one

===== PAGE 36 =====
honeybee	colony	fertilize	the	queens	of	other	colonies	to	create	inseminated
queens	that	will	give	rise	to	new	colonies.	Thus	both	trees	and	colonies	rely	on
cross-fertilization	to	avoid	the	problems	associated	with	inbreeding.
Colonies	and	trees	also	resemble	each	other	in	how	the	male	and	female	sides
of	reproduction	differ.	For	both	bees	and	trees,	the	male	side	of	reproduction	is
straightforward.	In	late	spring	and	early	summer,	each	colony	or	tree	produces	a
great	number	of	male	propagules—thousands	of	drone	bees	per	colony	and
millions	of	pollen	grains	per	tree—that	disperse	over	the	countryside	and
achieve	fertilizations.	Any	one	drone	bee	or	pollen	grain	has	a	low	probability	of
fertilizing	a	queen	or	egg,	but	because	a	healthy	individual	(colony	or	tree)
launches	a	huge	squadron	of	male	propagules,	it	has	a	high	probability	of
achieving	reproductive	success	via	its	small,	male	gene	carriers.
Turning	to	the	female	side	of	reproduction,	we	find	a	more	complex	process	in
both	colony	and	tree.	In	each,	the	fertilized	propagule	(queen	bee	or	egg	cell)	is
not	discharged	“naked,”	as	happens	with	the	male	propagules,	but	instead	is
packaged	
inside	a	large	and	intricate	dispersal	vehicle	that	will	give	it	protection
and	help	it	along.	Thus,	the	egg	cells	of	an	apple	tree	are	sent	forth	from	the
parent	tree	enclosed	in	apples,	whereby	each	egg	cell	is	surrounded	by	many
thousands	of	protective	cells	forming	the	tough	seed	coat	and	delicious	fruit
flesh.	Likewise,	the	queen	bees	of	a	honeybee	colony	are	sent	forth	from	the
parent	colony	enclosed	in	swarms,	whereby	each	queen	is	surrounded	by	some
ten	thousand	worker	bees	providing	a	living	shelter	and	food	supply.	Because
each	swarm	or	apple	is	many	thousand	times	larger	and	more	costly	than	each
drone	bee	or	pollen	grain,	it	is	no	surprise	that	a	colony	or	tree	produces
relatively	few	female	units	each	year,	usually	fewer	than	four	swarms	and	at
most	a	few	hundred	apples.	But	because	the	costly	female	propagules	are	well
protected	and	richly	endowed,	they	have	a	high	probability	of	successfully
establishing	a	new	colony	or	tree.	So,	despite	their	smaller	numbers,	swarms	and
apples	match	the	effectiveness	of	drone	bees	and	pollen	grains	in	propagating	the
genes	of	their	parents.
Swarming
In	upstate	New	York,	where	I	live,	my	colonies	begin	sending	forth	their	drones
in	late	April,	and	they	begin	casting	their	swarms—each	one	consisting	of	a
queen	accompanied	by	several	thousand	workers—a	week	or	two	later	in	early
May.	In	essence,	colony	reproduction	starts	up	shortly	after	winter	shuts	down.
Most	years,	the	swarming	season	begins	after	we’ve	enjoyed	a	few	weeks	with

===== PAGE 37 =====
warm	days	and	profuse	flowering	by	the	maple	trees	
(Acer
	spp.),	pussy	willow
bushes	
(Salix	discolor)
,	and	skunk	cabbage	plants	
(Symplocarpus	 foetidus).
During	this	time,	the	colonies	have	collected	much	food,	their	queens	have
diligently	laid	eggs,	and	their	worker	populations	have	rapidly	strengthened.	I
can	predict	with	fair	reliability	when	I	will	find	my	first	swarm	by	noting	when
my	hive	of	bees	mounted	on	platform	scales	finally	ends	its	six-month-long	free-
fall	in	weight	and	begins	to	bulk	up	again	on	fresh	nectar	and	pollen	(see	
fig.
2.8
).
Swarming	starts	early	in	the	summer	because	each	new	colony	has	much	to
accomplish	if	it	is	to	survive	the	following	winter.	Specifically,	each	swarm	(new
colony)	must	locate	a	suitable	nesting	cavity,	occupy	it,	and	then	build	a	set	of
beeswax	combs,	raise	new	workers,	and	store	sufficient	provisions	to	last
through	
winter.	Getting	an	early	start	certainly	helps	a	colony	clear	these	hurdles.
Even	so,	sadly,	many	new	colonies	don’t	store	up	enough	honey	and	so	starve
during	their	first	winter.	In	the	mid-1970s,	for	three	years	I	followed	the	fates	of
several	dozen	feral	honeybee	colonies	living	in	trees	and	houses	around	Ithaca,
and	I	found	that	less	than	25	percent	of	the	“founder”	colonies	(ones	newly
started	by	swarms)	would	be	alive	the	following	spring.	In	contrast,	almost	80
percent	of	the	“established”	colonies	(ones	already	in	residence	for	at	least	a
year)	would	survive	winter,	no	doubt	because	they	hadn’t	had	to	start	from
scratch	the	previous	summer.	Beekeepers	describe	the	time	and	energy	crunch
faced	by	swarms	in	a	rather	grim,	three-line	rhyme:	“A	swarm	of	bees	in	May	is
worth	a	load	of	hay,	a	swarm	of	bees	in	June	is	worth	a	silver	spoon,	a	swarm	in
July	isn’t	worth	a	fly.”
Whether	in	May,	June,	or	July,	the	first	step	that	a	colony	takes	to	prepare	for
swarming	is	the	rearing	of	10	or	more	queens,	all	daughters	of	the	mother	queen.
Queen	rearing	starts	with	the	construction	of	queen	cups,	tiny	inverted	bowls
made	of	beeswax.	They	are	built	usually	along	the	lower	edges	of	the	combs	in
which	the	colony	is	producing	brood	and	they	will	form	the	bases	of	the	large,
downward-pointing,	peanut-shaped	cells	in	which	the	queens	will	be	reared	(
fig.
2.10
).	Next,	the	queen	lays	eggs	in	a	dozen	or	more	of	the	queen	cups	and
workers	feed	the	hatching	larvae	the	royal	jelly	that	ensures	their	development
into	queens.	An	enduring	mystery	about	honeybees	is	what	exactly	stimulates	a
colony	to	begin	rearing	queens	and	thereby	initiate	the	process	of	swarming.
Beekeepers	know	that	certain	conditions	inside	a	colony’s	hive	(congestion	of
the	adult	bees,	numerous	immature	bees,	and	expanding	food	reserves)	and
outside	the	hive	(plentiful	forage	and	spring	time)	are	correlated	with	the	start	of
queen	rearing	for	swarming.	Nevertheless,	to	this	day,	no	one	knows	what

===== PAGE 38 =====
specific	stimuli	the	worker	bees	are	sensing	and	integrating	when	they	make	the
critical	decision	to	start	the	swarming	process.
The	development	of	the	new	queens	is	remarkably	rapid,	requiring	only	16
days	from	the	time	the	egg	is	laid	to	the	moment	when	an	adult	queen	emerges
from	her	cell.	While	these	daughter	queens	develop,	the	mother	queen	undergoes
changes	that	will	prepare	her	for	departure	in	the	swarm.	With	each	passing	day,
she	is	fed	less	and	less	by	the	workers.	Her	egg	production	declines,	and	her
abdomen,	no	longer	swollen	with	fully	formed	eggs,	shrinks	dramatically.
Furthermore,	the	workers	begin	to	show	mild	hostility	toward	their	mother,
shaking,	pushing,	and	lightly	biting	her.	Each	time	a	worker	shakes	the	queen,
she	grasps	the	queen	with	her	forelegs	and	shakes	her	own	body	for	a	second	or
so,	delivering	10	to	20	vigorous	shakings	of	the	queen	(
fig.	2.11
).	These	bouts	of
rough	handling,	which	eventually	can	become	nearly	continuous	(occurring
every	10	seconds	or	so),	force	the	queen	to	keep	walking	about	the	nest.	This
increased	exercise,	together	with	the	reduced	feeding,	results	in	a	25	percent
reduction	in	the	queen’s	body	weight.	In	this	way	the	mother	queen,	usually	too
large	and	heavy	to	fly,	is	put	into	flying	trim.

===== PAGE 39 =====
While	the	daughter	queens	are	maturing	and	the	mother	queen	is	slimming,
the	workers	are	also	preparing	for	the	impending	mass	departure	of	the	mother
queen	and	thousands	of	workers	in	a	swarm.	To	ensure	that	they	will	be	well
supplied	with	energy	when	they	leave	home,	the	workers	do	just	the	opposite	of
slimming;	they	stuff	themselves	with	honey,	causing	their	abdomens	to	swell

===== PAGE 40 =====
noticeably.	A	study	in	which	the	stomachs	of	workers	from	colonies	preparing	to
swarm	were	painstakingly	dissected	and	weighed	found	that	most	bees	had	filled
their	stomachs	with	a	drop	or	two	(35	to	55	milligrams)	of	honey,	thereby
increasing	their	body	weights	by	about	50	percent.	Thus	when	a	swarm	leaves	on
its	journey	to	a	new	home,	approximately	one-third	of	its	weight	is	a	food
reserve.	The	bloating	of	the	workers	is	not	their	only	conspicuous	adjustment	in
anticipation	of	swarming.	The	wax	glands,	located	on	the	ventral	plates	of	four
of	the	abdominal	segments	of	each	worker	bee,	become	hypertrophied	in
preparation	for	the	intense	wax	secretion	needed	for	comb	building	at	the	new
nest	site.	Turning	over	a	worker	bee	plucked	from	a	colony	that	is	poised	to
swarm	will	reveal	white	scales	of	beeswax	projecting	from	the	overlapping
ventral	plates	(
fig.	2.12
).	But	what	is	perhaps	the	most	striking	change	in	the
workers	just	before	swarming	is	their	greater	lethargy.	Many	of	these	laggards
hang	quietly	on	the	combs,	while	others	rest	in	a	thick	cluster	outside	the	hive
entrance,	giving	the	alert	beekeeper	a	helpful	warning	that	swarming	is
imminent.	The	biologist	and	comic	book	artist	Jay	Hosler	has	nicely	called	this
period	of	odd	inactivity	“the	calm	before	the	swarm.”	Several	dozen	bees,
however,	remain	active	and	start	scouring	the	countryside	for	five	or	more
kilometers	(three	miles)	in	all	directions	for	possible	nest	sites.	These
enterprising	individuals	are	nest-site	scouts,	the	central	figures	in	this	book,	and
in	
chapter	4
	we	will	see	who	they	are.
In	the	summer	of	2007,	I	learned	that	the	nest-site	scouts	play	a	key	role	in

===== PAGE 41 =====
triggering	the	next	main	event	in	swarming:	the	swarm’s	explosive	departure
from	the	parental	nest.	My	partner	in	this	work	was	one	of	my	graduate	students,
Juliana	Rangel,	who	is	a	fine	scientist,	being	smart,	cheerful,	and	hardworking.
We	learned	that	the	scout	bees	are	especially	well	qualified	to	instigate	the
swarm’s	mass	exodus	because	their	special	occupation	causes	them	to	spend
time	both	outside	and	inside	the	nest:	outside	to	hunt	for	potential	dwelling
places,	and	inside	to	refuel	and	rest.	Only	a	bee	that	has	information	from	both
indoors	and	outdoors	can	get	the	timing	right	for	the	swarm’s	departure.	From
her	time	inside,	a	scout	bee	can	tell	when	some	of	the	developing	queens	have
reached	the	pupal	stage	and	have	had	their	cells	sealed,	and	from	her	time
outside,	she	can	tell	when	the	weather	is	sunny	and	warm,	hence	favorable	for	a
journey.	When	both	of	these	requirements	for	swarming	are	fulfilled,	the	scouts
burst	into	action.	Starting	in	the	cluster	of	bees	just	outside	the	hive	entrance,	the
excited	scouts	begin	scrambling	among	their	cool,	calm	sisters.	Every	few
seconds,	each	scout	will	pause	by	a	quiet	bee	and	briefly	press	her	thorax	against
the	other	bee	while	activating	her	flight	muscles	to	produce	a	200-	to	250-hertz
(cycles	per	second)	vibration	that	lasts	for	a	second	or	so.	This	signal	is	called
worker	piping.	It	sounds	(because	of	high-frequency	harmonics)	like	the	engine
of	a	Formula	One	race	car	making	an	all-out	acceleration,	and	it	informs	the
quiescent	bees	that	it	is	time	to	warm	their	flight	muscles	by	shivering	to	a	fight-
ready	temperature	of	35°C	(95°F)	in	preparation	for	the	swarm’s	departure.	The
piping	by	the	scout	bees	is	intermittent	and	faint	at	first,	but	over	the	next	hour
or	so	it	gradually	becomes	steady	and	loud,	as	more	and	more	of	the	scouts	blast
out	the	message	“Time	to	warm	up!”	Ultimately,	the	piping-hot	scout	bees	sense
that	all	their	hive-mates	are	flight	ready—perhaps	by	consistently	contacting
suitably	warmed	bees—at	which	point	the	scouts	start	producing	a	second
arousal	signal,	the	buzz-run,	in	which	each	scout	bee	runs	about	the	nest	in	great
excitement,	tracing	out	a	crooked	path,	buzzing	her	wings	in	bursts,	and
bulldozing	between	sluggish	bees.	The	message	now	is	“Time	to	go!”
And	go	they	do!	Now	nearly	all	of	the	worker	bees	become	excited	and	run
about,	crowding	toward	the	entrance	opening	where	they	pour	out	in	a	torrent
and	take	to	the	air,	pushing	the	mother	queen	out	as	well,	creating	what
beekeepers	call	the	“prime	swarm”	(
fig.	2.13
).	It	contains	some	ten	thousand
bees,	about	two-thirds	of	the	colony’s	population.	These	swarming	bees	fly
round	each	other	in	a	wild	whirl,	forming	a	cloud	approximately	10	to	20	meters
(30	to	60	feet)	across,	with	their	queen	flying	somewhere	in	their	midst.	They
don’t	go	far.	Soon,	some	of	the	workers	settle	on	the	branch	of	a	tree	or	similar
object,	the	queen	joins	them,	and	over	the	next	10	or	20	minutes	the	whole	cloud

===== PAGE 42 =====
of	bees	will	condense	into	a	beard-shaped	cluster.	The	worker	bees	are	attracted
by	the	scent	of	the	queen	and	by	the	strong	lemony	odor	of	the	attraction
pheromones	that	the	first	settlers	are	releasing	from	their	scent	organs	(located
near	the	tip	of	the	abdomen)	and	are	dispersing	by	fanning	their	wings.	Over	the
next	several	hours,	or	several	days,	most	of	the	swarm	bees	will	hang	here
quietly,	while	the	scouts	will	busily	search	the	neighborhood	for	candidate
dwelling	places	and	choose	a	suitable	abode.	Once	the	scouts	have	completed
their	democratic	decision	making,	they	will	induce	the	whole	swarm	to	again
take	flight	and	then	will	guide	the	flying	swarm	to	its	new	home.
Back	in	the	parental	nest,	there	remain	a	few	thousand	worker	bees,	a	dozen	or
more	queen	cells,	many	thousand	cells	of	worker	brood,	and	much	food.	The
stay-at-home	workers	are	now	without	a	queen,	but	not	many	days	will	pass
before	the	first	of	the	new	queens	emerges.	During	the	waiting	period,	the	parent
colony’s	worker	population	will	rebound	as	new	workers	emerge.	Often,	so
many	new	workers	appear	that	the	colony’s	strength	is	restored	by	the	time	the
first	virgin	queen	emerges	from	her	sealed	queen	cell.	If	the	colony	does	regain
its	strength,	then	the	workers	will	chase	the	first	virgin	queen	away	from	the
remaining	queen	cells	to	prevent	her	from	destroying	them.	The	workers	will
also	refrain	from	chewing	away	the	wax	and	pupal	cocoon	fibers	on	the	capped
ends	of	the	queen	cells	to	prevent	the	other	virgin	queens	from	getting	free,	and
they	will	feed	the	confined	queens	whenever	they	beg	for	food	by	pushing	their
tongues	through	little	slits	in	their	cells.	At	the	same	time,	the	first	virgin	queen
to	emerge	will	announce	her	presence	with	queen	piping	signals,	called	“toots.”
A	queen	pipes	the	same	way	as	a	worker,	by	pressing	her	thorax	against	a
substrate	and	activating	her	flight	muscles.	A	queen,	however,	presses	herself

===== PAGE 43 =====
against	a	comb	instead	of	against	a	bee,	probably	to	give	her	signal	a	broader
audience.	Also,	a	queen’s	piping	signals	are	longer	than	those	of	a	worker,	for
they	contain	multiple	pulses	(
fig.	2.14
).	When	the	first	virgin	queen	pipes,	the
workers	instantly	cease	all	movement	for	the	duration	of	her	signal,	perhaps	to
minimize	the	background	noise	produced	by	their	myriad	footsteps,	and	the
virgin	queens	confined	in	their	cells	will	pipe	in	response,	producing	lower-
pitched	“quacks”	that	are	somewhat	longer	than	the	first	virgin	queen’s	“toots.”
These	quacks	almost	certainly	inform	the	first	virgin	queen	that	she	has	lethal
rivals.
This	bad	news	may	encourage	the	first	virgin	queen	to	leave	in	a	secondary
swarm,	what	beekeepers	call	an	“afterswarm.”	Doing	so	means	that	the	first
virgin	queen	relinquishes	the	wealth	of	desirable	resources	in	the	parent	nest—
the	beeswax	combs,	worker	brood,	and	honey	stores—and	starts	down	the	risky
path	of	founding	a	new	colony.	This	course	of	action	is,	however,	probably	less
dangerous	for	her	than	staying	home	and	attempting	to	kill	all	her	deadly	serious
competitors.	Soon,	the	workers	will	start	shaking	the	first	virgin	queen	to	prepare
her	for	flight,	and	in	a	few	days,	if	good	weather	prevails,	they	will	push	her	out
of	the	nest	during	the	departure	of	a	second	swarm.	This	process	is	repeated	with
each	emerging	queen	until	the	colony	is	weakened	to	the	point	where	it	cannot
support	further	swarming.	At	this	point,	if	there	are	still	multiple	virgin	queens	in
the	nest,	the	workers	will	allow	them	to	emerge	freely.	The	first	one	out	usually
attempts	to	kill	those	still	in	their	cells	by	dashing	over	the	combs	in	search	of
cells	containing	queens,	chewing	small	holes	in	their	sides,	and	stinging	the
occupants.	If,	however,	two	or	more	virgin	queens	emerge	together,	they	will
flight	to	the	death,	seizing	each	other	and	attempting	to	sting.	The	battling	queen
bees	grapple	and	twist,	each	one	struggling	fiercely	to	implant	her	venom-laden
sting	in	her	sister’s	abdomen.	Ultimately,	one	queen	succeeds	and	the	other,

===== PAGE 44 =====
fatally	stricken,	collapses	in	paralysis,	falls	from	the	comb,	and	soon	dies.	The
merciless	sororocide	continues	until	just	one	virgin	queen	remains	alive.	Several
days	later	the	victor	will	make	her	mating	flights	and,	once	fully	mated,	start	her
egg	laying.	Soon	her	daughters	and	sons	will	populate	the	coveted	parental	nest.
Any	virgin	queen	who	departed	in	an	afterswarm	will	likewise	make	mating
flights	once	she	and	her	workers	have	moved	into	their	new	home,	for	no	queen
ever	mates	inside	a	nest.

===== PAGE 45 =====
3
DREAM	HOME	FOR	HONEYBEES
If	I	can	with	confidence	say
That	still	for	another	day
,
Or	even	another	year
,
I	will	be	therefor	you,	my	dear
,
It	will	be	because,	though	small
As	measured	against	the	All
,
I	have	been	so	instinctively	thorough
About	my	crevice	and	burrow.
—Robert	Frost
,	A	Drumlin	Woodchuck,
	1936
	
	
L
ike	Robert	Frost’s	woodchuck,	a	honeybee	colony	is	“instinctively	thorough”
about	its	dwelling	place,	for	only	certain	tree	cavities	provide	good	protection
from	predators	and	suffcient	refuge	from	harsh	physical	conditions,	especially
strong	winds	and	deep	cold.	No	fewer	than	six	distinct	properties	of	a	potential
homesite—including	cavity	volume,	entrance	height,	entrance	size,	and	presence
of	combs	from	an	earlier	colony—are	assessed	to	produce	an	overall	judgment
of	a	site’s	quality.	The	care	with	which	honeybees	choose	their	homes	has	been
known	for	only	about	30	years,	which	might	seem	surprising	given	that	humans
have	been	culturing	these	bees	since	ancient	times.	The	reason	that	humans	have
only	recently	learned	about	the	bees’	real	estate	preferences	is	that	the	essence	of
beekeeping	is	the	tending	of	colonies	living	in	hives	fashioned	by	a	beekeeper
and	sited	where	the	beekeeper	wants	them.	The	earliest	solid	evidence	of
beekeeping	comes	from	Egypt,	around	2400	BC,	and	consists	of	a	stone	bas-
relief	in	a	temple	that	depicts	peasants	removing	honeycombs	from	a	stack	of
cylindrical	clay	hives	and	also	packing	the	honey	in	pots	(
fig.	3.1
).	Thus	for
some	4,400	years	the	people	living	in	closest	association	with	honeybees	have
focused	on	devising	housing	arrangements	for	bees	that	serve	human	purposes

===== PAGE 46 =====
and	have	largely	ignored	what	the	bees’	themselves	seek	in	a	home.	For
example,	manmade	hives	are	usually	much	more	spacious	than	natural	nest
cavities,	so	bees	living	in	an	apiary	will	store	more	honey	and	swarm	less	often
than	will	bees	living	in	nature.	Likewise,	a	beekeeper’s	hives	are	located	at
ground	level,	which	is	convenient	for	humans	but	dangerous	for	bees.	Honeybee
colonies	living	low	to	the	ground	are	easily	found	and	attacked	by	destructive
predators,	such	as	bears.
Nests	of	Wild	Colonies
In	1975,	when	I	began	to	study	the	democratic	house-hunting	process	of
honeybees	for	my	PhD	thesis	project,	I	decided	that	a	logical	first	step	was	to	try
to	identify	what	makes	a	dream	homesite	for	a	honeybee	colony.	This	would	tell
me	what	a	swarm	is	seeking	as	it	locates	multiple	candidate	sites	and	works	to
select	the	best	one.	I	suspected	that	to	identify	the	perfect	dwelling	place	for	a
honeybee	colony	would	be	a	challenge,	because	the	bees	might	evaluate	several
attributes	of	each	candidate	site,	and	they	might	weigh	each	attribute	differently
when	judging	the	overall	goodness	of	a	site.	Nevertheless,	I	figured	that	if	I
could	identify	what	attributes	are	important	to	the	bees	and	if	I	could	determine
what	preference	they	have	for	each	attribute,	then	I	would	be	close	to	achieving
my	goal.
I	also	figured	that	to	determine	the	bees’	real-estate	preferences,	I	should	start

===== PAGE 47 =====
by	finding	trees	housing	wild	colonies	of	honeybees,	sawing	them	down,	and
splitting	open	the	tree	sections	housing	the	bees’	nests	so	that	I	could	scrutinize
their	natural	living	quarters	(
fig.	3.2
).	Each	colony	living	in	nature	occupies	a
site	chosen	by	scout	bees,	so	it	seemed	reasonable	to	expect	that	consistencies	in
the	nest	sites	of	these	wild	colonies	would	yield	clues	about	the	bees’	nest-site
preferences.	And	there	could	be	little	doubt	that	these	preferences	lie	at	the	heart
of	the	bees’	whole	house-hunting	process,	for	it	is	these	preferences	that	guide
swarms	to	take	up	residence	in	suitable	nesting	cavities.
Back	in	1955,	Lindauer	had	reported	experiments,	conducted	in	the	open
countryside	east	of	Munich,	in	which	he	presented	one	swarm	at	a	time	with	a
pair	of	nest	boxes	that	differed	in	some	property,	and	then	he	observed	which
one	attracted	the	greatest	interest	from	the	swarm’s	scout	bees.	These
experiments	yielded	only	preliminary	findings,	because	Lindauer	could	perform
just	a	few	trials	for	each	test	of	a	particular	nest-site	property.	Nevertheless,	they
suggested	to	him	that	his	bees	had	chosen	among	his	nest	boxes	based	on
differences	in	protection	from	the	wind,	cavity	size,	presence	of	ants,	and	sun
exposure.	Lindauer	was	impressed	by	the	bees’	apparent	attention	to	multiple
properties	of	a	possible	residence	when	assessing	its	desirability,	wondered	what
the	ideal	bee	dwelling	might	be,	and	suggested	that	to	solve	this	mystery	“it
would	be	best	to	ask	the	bees	themselves	about	this	matter.”	I	would	start	to	do
so	by	examining	their	nests.
The	prospect	of	carefully	describing	the	nests	of	wild	honeybee	colonies
living	in	the	woods	attracted	me	for	emotional	as	well	as	rational	reasons.	While
an	undergraduate	student,	I	had	majored	in	chemistry	and	done	several	small
research	projects	in	organic	chemistry,	biochemistry,	and	biophysics.	Of	course,
these	investigations	were	all	conducted	indoors	in	clean,	brightly	illuminated,
and	nearly	lifeless	laboratories.	But	now,	as	a	beginning	graduate	student	in
biology	and	novice	investigator	of	animal	behavior,	I	was	keen	to	work	outdoors
using	what	has	been	called	the	von	Frisch–Lindauer	approach	to	animal	behavior
research.	In	their	autobiographical	
book,	Journey	to	the	Ants
,	Bert	Hölldobler
and	Edward	O.	Wilson	explain	that	von	Frisch	and	Lindauer	had	a	philosophy	of
research	based	on:	a	thorough,	loving	interest	in—a	feel	for—the	organism,
especially	as	it	fits	into	the	natural	environment.	Learn	the	species	of	your	choice
every	 way	 you	 can,	 this	 whole-organismic	 approach	 stipulates.	 Try	 to
understand,	or	at	the	very	least	try	to	imagine,	how	its	behavior	and	physiology
adapt	it	to	the	real	world.	Then	select	a	piece	of	behavior	that	can	be	separated
and	analyzed	as	though	it	were	a	bit	of	anatomy.	Having	identified	a
phenomenon	to	call	your	own,	press	the	investigation	in	the	most	promising

===== PAGE 48 =====
direction.
My	thesis	advisor,	Bert	Hölldobler,	had	presented	this	way	of	studying
behavior	in	his	ethology	course	at	Harvard	and,	more	importantly,	had
demonstrated	its	power	by	his	own	spectacularly	beautiful	studies	of	ant	social
behavior.	So,	by	the	end	of	my	first	year	in	graduate	school,	I	was	raring	to	go.	I
wanted	to	gain	a	feel	for	honeybees	living	in	nature,	to	further	analyze	the
house-hunting	piece	of	their	behavior,	and	to	see	if	I	could	press	the
investigation	on	from	where	Martin	Lindauer	had	left	it	some	20	years	before.
I	knew	that	I	would	abscond	from	Harvard	the	moment	I	had	finished	taking
my	final	exams	for	the	spring	semester,	and	I	had	my	mind	set	on	returning	to
the	Dyce	Laboratory	for	Honey	Bee	Studies,	at	Cornell,	where	I	had	worked	for
the	previous	four	summers	when	an	undergraduate	student.	The	director	of	the
lab,	Professor	Roger	A.	Morse,	was	truly	a	generous	man.	He	welcomed	me
back,	assigned	me	a	desk,	and	provided	several	essential	tools	for	the	project—a

===== PAGE 49 =====
powerful	chain	saw,	steel	wedges	and	maul,	and	one	of	the	lab’s	green	pickup
trucks.	Most	importantly,	“Doc”	Morse	arranged	for	me	to	team	up	with	a
member	of	the	Entomology	Department’s	technical	staff,	Herb	Nelson,	who	had
worked	as	a	logger	in	the	Maine	woods	when	a	teenager	and	could	teach	me	how
to	cut	down	big	trees	without	getting	killed.
Herb	and	I	started	with	some	of	the	bee	trees	I	had	discovered	back	in	high
school	while	exploring	the	woods	around	my	family’s	home.	These	were
augmented	with	ones	that	I	located	through	a	want	ad	I	placed	in	the	local
newspaper,	the	
Ithaca	Journal.
	The	ad	read,	“
BEE	TREES
	wanted.	Will	pay
$15	or	15	lb	of	honey	for	a	tree	housing	a	live	colony	of	honeybees.	607-254-
5443.”	I	feared	I’d	get	no	calls,	but	within	a	week	I	had	secured	the	rights	to	18
accessible	bee	trees	in	the	woods	around	Ithaca.	Two	owners	took	payment	in
money;	all	the	rest	wanted	honey.
The	procedure	for	collecting	these	nests	was	simple	but	somewhat	dangerous.
Shortly	before	sunrise,	when	all	bees	were	still	at	home,	I	would	hike	to	a	bee
tree	with	a	can	of	calcium	cyanide	powder	(Cyanogas),	an	old	spoon,	and	some
rags.	If	the	nest	entrance	was	high	in	a	tree	that	I	couldn’t	climb,	I	’d	also	bring
an	aluminum	extension	ladder.	My	aim	was	to	spoon	cyanide	powder	into	the
nest	entrance	and	then	quickly	plug	it	with	the	rags.	The	cyanide	powder	would
react	with	moisture	in	the	air	producing	cyanide	gas	that	would	kill	the	bees	but,
if	all	went	according	to	plan,	not	me.	(Once	I	did	drop	the	can	of	Cyanogas	from
the	ladder,	spilling	much	of	its	contents,	but	I	managed	to	hold	my	breath	long
enough	to	climb	down,	get	the	lid	back	on	the	can,	and	dash	out	of	the	expanding
cloud	of	deadly	gas.)	By	first	killing	the	bees,	we	could	later	fell	the	tree	and
collect	the	nest	without	being	ferociously	attacked.	This	protocol	also	enabled
me	to	census	the	bee	population	of	each	wild	colony	when	I	dissected	its	nest.
Having	killed	the	bees,	I’d	return	to	Dyce	Lab	to	pick	up	Herb	and	load	the
truck	with	the	tools	we’d	need	for	the	day:	chain	saw,	wedges	and	maul,	rope,
ramp	boards,	tape	measure,	magnetic	compass,	35	mm	camera,	and	notebook.
Our	goal	was	to	cut	down	the	bee	tree	I	had	just	visited,	saw	out	the	trunk
section	housing	the	nest,	wrestle	it	onto	the	truck,	and	haul	it	back	to	the	lab.	I
recall	being	impressed	by	Herb’s	confidence	in	driving	the	truck	deep	into	the
woods	to	get	near	each	bee	tree	(“We’ll	have	plenty	of	traction	for	getting	back
out,	once	we	get	that	big	log	loaded	on.”)	and	by	his	careful	inspection	of	each
tree’s	lean	and	crown	before	starting	his	cutting	(“You	gotta	know	which	way	the
tree	wants	to	fall.”).	Herb’s	lumberjack	skills	weren’t	rusty,	and	each	tree	arced
down	neatly	into	the	woods	opening	he	had	chosen.	Once	we	had	a	tree	lying	on

===== PAGE 50 =====
the	ground,	we	proceeded	to	cut	out	the	section	containing	the	nest.	We	did	this
by	making	a	series	of	crosscuts,	starting	far	above	and	far	below	the	nest
entrance,	and	then	working	our	way	closer	and	closer	to	the	entrance	until	the
chain	saw	started	spitting	dark-brown	punk	wood	or	yellow-brown	beeswax,
indicating	we	had	breached	the	nest	cavity.	We	then	rolled	the	nest-containing
log—sometimes	a	massive,	2-meter-long	(6-foot)	and	nearly	1-meter-thick	(3-
foot)	section	of	the	tree’s	bole—up	into	the	truck,	got	it	back	to	the	lab,	and	split
it	open	(
fig.	3.3
).	Finally,	we	would	lug	the	opened	nest	indoors	where	I	could
dissect	it	carefully	under	good	light	while	measuring	important	features	of	the
nest	cavity	and	its	contents.	To	measure	the	volume	of	the	cavity,	I	filled	it	with
liter	after	liter	of	sand	after	removing	the	combs.	As	I	picked	through	the	broken
combs	and	dead	bees,	sooner	or	later	coming	across	the	lifeless	queen,	I	felt	sad
to	have	killed	a	whole	colony,	but	also	excited,	knowing	that	I	was	the	first
human	to	describe	in	detail	the	natural	homes	of	honeybees.
Over	the	summer	of	1975,	we	collected	and	I	dissected	21	bee	tree	nests,
enough	to	give	us	a	broad	picture	of	the	nests	of	wild	colonies	living	in	the
woods.	I	also	located	another	18	nests	in	trees	that	were	left	standing	and	so
yielded	information	only	about	their	entrance	openings.	Since	the	nest	entrance

===== PAGE 51 =====
is	the	“front	door”	of	a	colony’s	home	it	is	probably	especially	important	to	the
bees,	so
	I	gave	it	extra	attention.	We	found	that	the	bees	occupied	many	kinds	of
trees,	including	oaks	(
Quercus
	spp.),	walnuts	(
Juglans
	spp.),	elms	(
Ulmus
	spp.),
pines	(
Pinus
	spp.),	hickories	(
Carya
	spp.),	ashes	(
Fraxinus
	spp.),	and	maples
(
Acer
	spp.).	This	suggested	that	the	bees	don’t	have	a	strong	preference	for
certain	tree	species.
Not	surprisingly,	the	tree	cavities	occupied	by	the	bees	were	generally	tall	and
cylindrical,	consistent	with	the	shape	of	tree	trunks.	But	what	was	surprising	was
the	discovery	that	most	of	these	wild	colonies	were	occupying	tree	cavities	much
smaller	than	the	hives	provided	by	beekeepers.	The	average	nest	cavity	was	only
about	20	centimeters	(8	inches)	in	diameter	and	150	centimeters	(60	inches)	tall;
hence,	it	had	a	volume	of	only	about	45	liters	(41	quarts)	(
fig.	3.4
).	A	tree	cavity
of	this	size	provides	only	one-quarter	to	one-half	of	the	living	space	provided	by
a	beekeeper’s	hive.	Were	the	bees	telling	me	that	they	prefer	relatively	small	and
snug	nest	sites,	ones	in	which	it	might	be	easier	to	keep	warm	in	winter?	Some
of	the	colonies	even	occupied	tree	cavities	with	only	20	to	30	liters	of	nesting
space,	though	none	was	found	in	a	space	smaller	than	12	liters.	Was	this	lower
limit	of	about	12	liters	a	sign	that	bees	carefully	avoid	excessively	cramped
quarters,	ones	lacking	sufficient	room	for	storing	the	honey	needed	to	survive
winter?	Certainly	the	bees	living	in	these	tree	cavities	were	making	good	use	of
their	living	space,	for	each	colony	had	nearly	filled	its	nest	cavity	with	multiple
combs.	Because	each	comb	formed	a	wall-to-wall	curtain	spanning	the
(generally)	narrow	tree	cavity,	I	was	impressed	by	the	way	the	bees	had	built
small	passageways	in	the	combs	where	they	were	attached	to	the	cavity’s	wall,
so	they	could	crawl	easily	from	one	comb	to	the	next.	And	it	was	clear	that	these
bees	had	organized	their	use	of	their	combs	in	the	way	familiar	to	all	beekeepers,
storing	honey	in	the	upper	region	of	the	nest	and	rearing	brood	below.	The	nests
collected	in	August,	by	the	way,	revealed	that	most	colonies	had	been	making
good	progress	in	stockpiling	their	winter	heating	fuel.	The	nests	that	I	dissected
contained,	on	average,	14	kilograms	(30	pounds)	of	golden	honey.	Regrettably,	it
was	all	laced	with	cyanide.
The	entrance	openings	of	the	bees’	nests	also	showed	consistencies	that
suggested	possible	nest-site	preferences	by	the	bees.	Most	nest	entrances
consisted	of	a	single	knothole	or	crack	with	a	total	area	of	just	10	to	30	square
centimeters	(2	to	5	square	inches)	(
fig.	3.5
).	And	typically	they	were	located	near
the	floor	of	the	tall	tree	cavity,	on	the	south	side	of	the	tree,	and	close	to	ground
level.	The	trends	toward	small	size,	floor	level,	and	southern	orientation	all	made
good	sense	to	me,	for	they	would	make	the	nest	cavity	inaccessible	to	most

===== PAGE 52 =====
predators,	relatively	free	of	drafts,	and	perhaps	warmed	by	the	sun—all	things
that	would	be	good	for	a	colony.	But	the	preponderance	of	nest	entrances	just	a
few	feet	from	the	ground	puzzled	me	greatly.	I	figured	that	a	low	nest	entrance
must	render	a	colony	vulnerable	to	detection	by	predators,	such	as	bears,	whose
attacks	can	be	fatal.	And	I	knew	that	in	medieval	times,	in	the	forests	of	northern
Europe	(Germany,	Poland,	and	Russia),	one	of	the	ancestral	homes	of	the
honeybees	imported	to	North	America,	raids	by	bears	on	honeybee	nests	in	trees
were	such	a	great	trouble	for	the	forest	beekeepers	who	owned	these	nests	that
they	invented	horrific	devices	to	kill	honey-loving	bears.	One	was	a	hinged
platform	mounted	outside	a	bee	nest.	When	a	bear	climbed	onto	it	to	attack	the
bees,	it	would	collapse,	causing	the	bear	to	tumble	onto	a	grid	of	deadly	sharp
stakes	below.
So	at	first	I	was	perplexed	by	the	rarity	of	nests	high	in	trees.	But	as	will	be
explained	shortly,	we	now	know	that	bees	actually	have	a	strong	preference	for
nesting	cavities	with	entrances	located	high	above	the	ground.	I	also	now	know
that	my	initial	report	of	most	nests	being	near	ground	level	was	an	error
generated	by	an	unintentional	bias	in	the	way	I	had	sampled	the	population	of
natural	nests.	Because	the	nests	I	studied	were	ones	that	had	been	noticed
inadvertently	by	a	person	walking	past	a	bee	tree,	and	because	people	are	much
more	likely	to	notice	bees	trafficking	from	a	ground-level	nest	entrance	than	a
tree-top	one,	I	unwittingly	studied	nests	whose	entrances	were	far	lower	than	is
typical.	I	am	confident	on	this	point	because	several	years	later,	when	I	became	a
bee	hunter	and	mastered	the	ancient	craft	of	lining	bees	(locating	bee	trees	by
baiting	foragers	from	flowers	and	observing	their	flights	back	to	their	nests),	I
found	that	every	hunt	ended	with	me	straining	to	spy	the	bees	zipping	in	and	out
of	a	nest	entrance	high	in	a	tree,	like	the	one	shown	in	
figure	3.2
.	To	date,	I	have
located	27	bee	trees	by	bee	lining	and	can	report	that	the	average	height	of	their
nest	entrances	is	6.5	meters	(21	feet).	Needless	to	say,	I’m	now	alert	to	the
hidden	danger	of	unintentional	sampling	bias.

===== PAGE 53 =====
Location,	Location,	Location
Even	though	the	descriptive	study	of	the	natural	homes	of	honeybees	was
destructive,	it	remains	one	of	my	favorite	studies,	for	it	put	me	in	touch	with
honeybees	living	in	nature	and	it	helped	me	gain	some	self-confidence	as	a
researcher.	It	also	guided	me	throughout	the	next	step	of	my	investigation	of	how
honeybee	swarms	
choose	a	home:	testing	whether	the	nest-site	patterns	we	had
found—in	cavity	volume,	entrance	area,	entrance	height,	and	so	forth—were	a
result	of	preferences	of	scout	bees	or	were	simply	a	consequence	of	the	tree
cavities	that	were	available.	The	idea	for	the	design	of	the	test	came	from	what	I
had	read	about	beekeeping	in	East	Africa	and	South	Africa.	In	these	regions,
beekeepers	acquire	bees	by	hanging	hives	(usually	hollowed	logs	with	the	ends
stoppered	except	for	an	entrance	hole)	in	trees	and	waiting	for	swarms	to	occupy
them.	I	had	not	heard	or	read	of	anybody	in	North	America	catching	swarms
with	“bait	hives,”	but	I	reasoned	that	if	one	could	do	so,	then	I	could	ask	the	bees
about	their	nest-site	preferences	by	putting	up	groups	of	two	or	three	nest	boxes,
with	the	boxes	in	each	group	identical	except	for	one	property,	such	as	cavity
volume	or	the	height	of	the	entrance	above	the	ground.	I	hoped	that	scouts	from
wild	swarms	would	discover	the	groups	of	nest	boxes	and	would	reveal	their
real-estate	preferences	by	choosing	among	the	boxes	in	a	group	and	consistently
occupying	those	with	certain	attributes.
Almost	always,	one	starts	an	experimental	study	with	a	small-scale,	low-cost

===== PAGE 54 =====
pilot	study	to	figure	out	what	methods	are	apt	to	work	before	undertaking	a
costly	full-scale	investigation.	In	the	summer	of	1975,	I	did	a	pilot	study	to	see	if
wild	swarms	would	occupy	bait	hives	often	enough	to	give	my	experimental
plan	a	reasonable	chance	of	success.	Using	some	scrap	plywood	scrounged	from
Dyce	Lab,	I	built	six	nest	boxes,	each	one	a	simple	cubic	box	35	centimeters	(14
inches)	wide,	tall,	and	deep,	and	bearing	a	4.5-centimeter	(1.75-inch)	diameter
entrance	hole	on	the	front	side.	I	designed	these	boxes	to	mimic	the	nest	cavities
I	was	finding	in	bee	trees.	My	bee	houses	looked	like	birdhouses	on	steroids,
except	that	each	one	had	chicken	wire	nailed	over	its	entrance	opening	to	keep
birds	out	while	letting	bees	in.	I	took	each	nest	box	to	a	place	I	knew	that	I’d
enjoy	visiting	in	my	home	“territory”	of	Ellis	Hollow,	and	nailed	it	about	5
meters	(15	feet)	of	the	ground	onto	the	side	of	a	large	tree.	I	still	remember
vividly	the	thrill	I	felt	a	few	weeks	later,	in	late	June,	when	I	checked	the	nest
box	that	I	’d	mounted	on	a	dead	elm	tree	along	Cascadilla	Creek	and	saw	dozens
of	leather-colored	honeybees	bustling	in	and	out	of	its	entrance.	A	swarm	had
moved	in!	Yippee!!	When	swarms	occupied	two	more	of	my	nest	boxes	over	the
next	few	weeks,	I	was	even	more	excited.	This	pilot	study	had	been	simple,	but
it	had	
yielded	the	triumph	of	knowing	that	my	experimental	plan	was	likely	to
work.	My	plan	for	the	next	summer	was	now	clear:	I	had	to	set	out	dozens	and
dozens	of	nest	boxes	of	various	designs	to	“ask	the	bees	about	this	matter”	of
their	ideal	dwelling	place.
The	plan	worked	well.	Each	summer	in	1976	and	1977,	I	set	up	more	than	two
hundred	green	nest	boxes	in	groups	of	two	or	three	across	Tompkins	County	and
each	summer	over	half	of	my	nest-box	groups	attracted	at	least	one	wild	swarm.
The	boxes	within	each	group	were	spaced	about	10	meters	(33	feet)	apart	on
similar-sized	trees	or,	even	better	yet,	on	power-line	poles	where	they	were
perfectly	matched	in	visibility,	wind	exposure,	and	the	like	(
fig.	3.6
).	Each	group
of	boxes	was	designed	to	test	one	nest-site	preference,	and	it	did	so	by	giving
swarms	a	choice	between	one	box	whose	properties	all	matched	those	of	a
typical
	nest	site	in	nature	(e.g.,	average	entrance	area,	average	cavity	volume,
etc.)	and	one	or	two	other	boxes	identical	to	the	first	except	in	one	property,	the
value	of	which	was	
atypical
.	In	this	way,	wild	swarms	were	tested	for	a
preference	in	the	one	variable	that	differed	between	the	boxes.	For	example,	to
test	for	a	preference	in	entrance	size,	I	set	up	pairs	of	cubical	nest	boxes	that
were	identical	except	that	one	had	a	typical	entrance	area	of	12.5	square
centimeters	(2.5	square	inches)	and	the	other	had	a	larger	than	usual	entrance
area	of	75	square	centimeters	(15	square	inches).	Similarly,	to	test	for	a
preference	in	cavity	size,	I	set	up	trios	of	cubical	nest	boxes	that	were	identical

===== PAGE 55 =====
except	that	one	box	had	the	typical	cavity	volume	of	40	liters	while	the	other	two
boxes	had	volumes	at	the	two	tails	of	the	distribution	of	nest	cavity	volumes:	10
and	100	liters.
To	build	the	many	nest	boxes	needed	for	this	study,	I	spent	most	of	my
Christmas	break	in	1975	sawing	and	hammering	and	painting	in	the	woodshop	at
Dyce	Lab.	There	I	constructed	252	nest	boxes	and	used	up	enough	plywood
(more	than	70	sheets)	for	building	a	small	house.	With	these	hundreds	of	nest
boxes,	I	would	eventually	capture	124	swarms	in	1976	and	1977.
As	is	shown	in	
table	3.1
,	the	swarms	demonstrated	preferences	in	the
following	nest-site	variables:	entrance	size,	entrance	direction,	entrance	height
above	the	ground,	entrance	height	above	the	cavity	floor,	cavity	volume,	and
presence	of	combs	in	the	cavity.	The	bees	had	revealed	to	me	that	they	prefer	a
nest	entrance	that	is	rather	small,	faces	south,	is	high	of	the	ground,	and	opens
into	the	bottom	of	the	nest	cavity.	These	four	preferences	regarding	the	entrance
opening	no	doubt	help	a	honeybee	colony	survive	against	threats	of	cold	winters
and	dangerous	predators.	A	small	entrance	is	easily	defended	and	helps	isolate
the	nest	from	the	outside	environment.	An	entrance	high	up	in	a	tree	is	less	apt	to
be	discovered	by	predators	than	one	near	the	ground,	and	is	certainly
inaccessible	to	predators	that	cannot	fly	or	climb	trees.	An	entrance	at	the	bottom
of	the	nest	cavity	rather	than	at	the	top	may	help	to	minimize	the	loss	of	heat
from	the	colony	by	convection	currents.	And	an	entrance	that	faces	south
provides	a	warm,	solar-heated	porch	from	which	foragers	can	take	of	and	on
which	they	can	land.	Beekeepers,	incidentally,	face	their	hives	to	the	south	to
help	their	bees	fly	out	in	cool	weather.	This	southern	orientation	is	particularly
important	in	the	winter	months,	when	bees	go	outside	on	sunny	days	to	make
their	critical	“cleansing	flights,”	that	is,	to	defecate.	A	Canadian	bee	researcher
based	in	Alberta,	Tibor	Szabo,	compared	colonies	living	in	south-facing	and
north-facing	hives.	He	found	that	those	in	south-facing	hives	were	less	apt	to
suffer	a	hive	entrance	plugged	by	ice	in	winter	and	were	more	populous	in
spring.

===== PAGE 56 =====
The	pattern	of	nest-box	occupations	by	swarms	also	showed	clearly	that	the
bees	avoid	cavities	smaller	than	10	liters	or	greater	than	100	liters,	and	that	they
very	much	like	40-liter	cavities	(about	the	size	of	a	wastebasket),	especially	ones
already	equipped	with	combs.	Probably	the	main	problem	the	bees	face
regarding	cavity	volume	is	avoiding	undersized	cavities,	since	most	tree	cavities
are	too	small	(less	than	about	15	liters)	to	hold	the	store	of	honey	a	colony	needs
to	survive	winter.	The	evidence	supporting	this	assertion	comes	from	a	small
study	I	did	with	one	of	my	brothers,	Daniel	H.	Seeley,	who	owns	a	whole
hillside	in	Vermont	that	was	logged	in	the	1800s	but	is	now	forested	with	stately
sugar	maple	
(Acer	saccharum)
	and	beech	
(Fagus	grandifolia)
	trees.	In	October
1976,	Dan	and	I	packed	up	logging	tools	and	drove	north	from	Cambridge,
Massachusetts,	to	Roxbury,	Vermont,	to	spend	several	days	of	Indian	summer
finding	out	what	size	cavities	scout	bees	are	apt	to	encounter	when	prospecting
for	homesites.	Working	over	a	0.32-hectare	(0.8-acre)	area,	we	felled	every	tree
more	than	30	centimeters	(12	inches)	in	diameter,	and	we	sawed	each	felled	tree
into	120-centimeter	(4-foot)	lengths	to	expose	any	cavities	they	contained.	We
dissected	39	trees	and	found	14	cavities	with	an	opening	to	the	outside	that	could
provide	access	to	a	scout	bee.	Of	these	14	tree	hollows,	only	two	(14	percent)
were	larger	than	15	liters;	they	were	32	and	39	liters.

===== PAGE 57 =====
The	preference	for	a	site	filled	with	combs—built	by	a	preceding	colony	that
did	not	survive	winter—doubtless	refects	the	tremendous	energy	savings	that	a
colony	enjoys	if	it	occupies	a	site	already	furnished	with	a	full	set	of	combs.	The
energy	thus	saved	turns	out	to	be	a	large	fraction	of	the	honey	store	that	a
fledgling	colony	needs	to	survive	its	first	winter.	This	is	shown	by	the	following
calculations.	A	typical	nest	in	a	bee	tree	contains	some	100,000	cells	arranged	in
eight	or	so	combs	whose	total	surface	area	is	about	two	and	half	square	meters	(3
square	yards).	Building	this	impressive	edifice	requires	about	1,200	grams	(2.5
pounds)	of	beeswax.	Given	that	the	weight-to-weight	efficiency	of	beeswax
synthesis	from	sugar	is	at	most	about	0.20,	we	can	estimate	that	building	the
combs	in	a	typical	nest	requires	about	6.0	kilograms	of	sugar,	hence	about	7.5
kilograms	(16	pounds)	of	honey.	This	mass	of	honey	is	about	one-third	of	what	a
colony	will	consume	over	winter.	Storing	these	7.5	kilograms	of	honey	in	the
colony’s	food	supply	for	winter	rather	than	spending	it	on	comb	building	will
greatly	boost	a	colony’s	odds	of	surviving	its	first	winter.	Recall	that	I	found	that
76	percent	of	the	colonies	newly	established	in	tree	cavities	around	Ithaca	die
during	their	first	winter,	and	that	nearly	all	of	the	colonies	that	do	so	succumb	to
starvation.
The	nest-site	properties	for	which	I	detected	no	preference	were	entrance
shape,	cavity	shape,	cavity	draftiness,	and	cavity	dryness.	Honeybees	probably
prefer	tight	and	dry	nest	cavities,	but	because	a	colony	can	caulk	with	tree	resins
any	cracks	and	crevices	that	let	in	drafts	and	water,	the	nest-site	scouts
apparently	do	not	pay	much	heed	to	these	properties.	In	contrast,	a	colony	cannot

===== PAGE 58 =====
modify	the	volume	of	a	nest	cavity,	the	height	of	its	entrance,	or	the	direction	in
which	it	faces,	so	to	get	a	homesite	that	meets	its	needs	in	these	properties	the
nest-site	scouts	must	pay	close	attention	to	these	properties	when	evaluating
prospective	nest	sites.	The	ability	of	a	honeybee	colony	to	remedy	a	drafty	or
damp	site	was	neatly	demonstrated	by	the	swarm	bees	that	occupied	my
experimental	nest	boxes.	I	had	rendered	some	of	the	boxes	drafty	by	riddling
their	fronts	and	sides	with	six-millimeter	(quarter-inch)	diameter	holes	spaced
7.5	centimeters	(3	inches)	apart	(
fig.	3.7
).	Other	boxes	I	had	made	damp	by
dumping	2	liters	(2	quarts)	of	waterlogged	sawdust	onto	the	floor	of	each	box.
Every	swarm	that	moved	into	one	of	the	drafty	boxes	soon	made	it	draft	free	by
plugging	with	tree	resins	all	the	holes	I	had	drilled.	Likewise,	every	swarm	that
occupied	one	of	the	damp	boxes	quickly	rendered	it	dry	by	hauling	out	all	the
soggy	sawdust	that	I	had	dumped	inside.	I	was	greatly	impressed	by	the	bees’
tidiness.

===== PAGE 59 =====
Freebies
One	thing	that	makes	studying	honeybees	so	enjoyable	is	the	way	that	what	is
learned	through	curiosity-driven	research	often	turns	out,	unexpectedly,	to	have
real	practical	value.	My	best	example	of	this	phenomenon	is	the	way	that
knowing	something	about	the	defecation	habits	of	Asian	honeybees	helped
defuse	tensions	between	the	United	States	and	the	Soviet	Union	back	in	the
1980s.	This	story	starts	in	the	late	1970s	when	I	had	finished	graduate	school
and	was	keen	to	travel	overseas	and	learn	about	the	marvelous	species	of
honeybees	that	live	in	the	Asian	tropics:	the	Asian	hive	honeybee	
(Apis	cerana)
,
the	dwarf	honeybee	
(Apis	florea)
,	and	the	giant	honeybee	
(Apis	dorsata).
	With
support	from	the	National	Geographic	Society,	my	wife	Robin	and	I	undertook	a

===== PAGE 60 =====
10-month	study	of	the	colony	defense	strategies	of	the	three	Asian	honeybee
species	living	in	Thailand.	We	set	up	camp	in	the	pristine	mountain	forests	of	the
vast	Khao	Yai	National	Park	in	northeast	Thailand,	where	one	can	still	enjoy	the
sight	of	hornbills	wing	
ing	their	way	between	towering	dipterocarp	trees,	the
eerie	smell	of	Asian	tiger	urine	deposited	along	a	trail,	the	whooping	calls	of
white-faced	gibbons	shortly	after	sunrise,	and	the	mysterious	biology	of	the
Asian	honeybees.	Gradually	we	assembled	a	picture	of	each	honeybee	species’
fascinatingly	complex	array	of	colony	defenses	against	such	enemies	as	giant
hornets,	weaver	ants,	honey	buzzards,	tree	shrews,	rhesus	monkeys,	and	honey
bears.	This	was	field	biology	done	for	biology’s	sake,	and	it	was	a	wonderful
adventure	for	two	newlyweds.	Sometimes	I	wonder,	though,	if	even	half	a	dozen
biologists	worldwide	have	read	closely	the	beautifully	detailed,	21	page	report
on	the	Asian	honeybees	that	we	published	in	the	scientific	journal	
Ecological
Monographs.
A	few	years	later,	however,	and	to	my	amazement,	the	knowledge	that	we’d
gained	about	the	Asian	honeybees	proved	important	to	a	large	international
audience.	In	1981,	the	secretary	of	state	in	the	Reagan	administration,	Alexander
M.	Haig,	alleged	that	the	Soviet	Union	was	waging	or	abetting	chemical	warfare
against	opponents	of	the	communist	governments	in	two	countries	bordering
Thailand:	Laos	and	Kampuchea.	If	true,	this	was	a	violation	of	two	international
arms-control	treaties,	the	1925	Geneva	Protocol	and	the	1972	Biological
Weapons	Convention.	The	main	evidence	cited	by	Haig	was	a	material	called
“yellow	rain,”	that	is,	yellow	spots	less	than	6	millimeters	(one-quarter	inch)	in
diameter	that	were	found	on	vegetation	at	alleged	attack	sites	and	that
supposedly	contained	fungal	toxins.	I	realized,	however,	that	the	yellow	spots
that	U.S.	officials	called	yellow	rain	were	indistinguishable	from	the	yellow
spots	I	called	honeybee	feces.	They	were	identical	in	size,	shape,	and	color.
Further	work	revealed	that	both	contained	bee	hairs	and	were	laden	with	pollen
grains	from	which	the	protein	had	been	digested.	Eventually,	I	was	able	to	help
Matthew	Meselson,	a	professor	of	molecular	genetics	at	Harvard	and	an	expert
on	chemical	and	biological	weapons,	show	conclusively	that	yellow	rain	was
indeed	honeybee	feces,	not	chemical	warfare.	One	wag	said	we	had	uncovered
the	work	of	“KGBs.”	Shortly	after	yellow	rain	was	proven	to	be	bee	poop,	in
1984,	officials	of	the	U.S.	State	Department,	without	fanfare,	ceased	accusing
the	Soviets	of	violating	the	two	arms-control	treaties	on	chemical	and	biological
weapons.
The	yellow	rain	story	is	a	striking	example	of	how	research	rooted	in	sheer
curiosity	can	unexpectedly	yield	useful	knowledge,	but	it	is	not	so	unusual,	for

===== PAGE 61 =====
real-world	benefits	often	bubble	up	from	basic	research.	My	first	taste	of
pursuing	personal	curiosity	and	getting	an	unexpected	bonus	of	practical	results
came	from	my	study	with	Doc	Morse	of	the	nest-site	preferences	of	swarms.	In
the	summer	of	1976,	we	had	groups	of	nest	boxes	set	up	in	more	than	100	sites
around	Tompkins	County,	and	we	caught	more	than	60	swarms.	Given	our	high
success	rate	in	trapping	swarms,	Doc	realized	that	we	should	translate	our
findings	 about	 the	 bees’	 nest-site	 preferences	 into	 recommendations	 for
beekeepers	on	how	to	build	and	position	bait	hives	to	catch	wild	swarms	of
honeybees.	We	prepared	a	simple	design	(
fig.	3.8
)	along	with	a	set	of	guidelines
for	situating	bait	hives—a	good	location	is	about	5	meters	(15	feet)	of	the
ground,	highly	visible	but	fully	shaded,	and	facing	south—and	published	these
in	the	beekeeping	magazine	
Gleanings	 in	 Bee	 Culture
	and	as	a	Cornell
Cooperative	Extension	Bulletin.	Beekeepers	responded	enthusiastically.	Before
this,	beekeepers	wanting	to	capture	wild	swarms	had	to	rely	on	being	notified
when	a	swarm	had	settled	somewhere,	then	they	had	to	hurry	to	put	it	in	a	hive
before	the	bees	finished	selecting	a	nest	site	and	few	away	to	their	chosen	home.
With	bait	hives,	beekeepers	can	collect	swarms	automatically.
In	recent	years,	other	bee	scientists	have	designed	cheaper,	lighter,	and
tougher	bait	hives	made	of	reinforced	wood	pulp	material,	and	have	devised
scent	 lures	 that	 slowly	 leak	 a	 1:1:1	 blend	 of	 chemicals
(citral:geraniol:nerolic+geranic	acids)	from	a	small	polyethylene	vial.	These
scent	lures	mimic	the	attraction	phero-mones	that	scout	bees	release	from	their
scent	organs	to	mark	a	desirable	home-site	(discussed	further	in	
chapter	8
).
Experiments	by	Justin	Schmidt	at	the	USDA	Bee	Research	Center	in	Tucson,
Arizona,	have	shown	that	a	bait	hive	with	a	scent	lure	can	be	five	times	more
likely	to	attract	a	swarm	than	one	without	a	lure,	probably	because	the	artificial
attraction	pheromones	makes	a	bait	hive	much	more	likely	to	be	discovered	by	a
scout	bee,	but	perhaps	by	also	making	it	more	attractive.	Wood	pulp	bait	hives
(sometimes	called	“swarm	traps”)	and	swarm	scent	lures	are	now	produced
commercially	and	are	sold	by	the	companies	that	sell	beekeeping	equipment.
Each	summer,	I	put	up	a	half	dozen	bait	hives,	partly	because	I	can	always	use	a
few	additional	colonies	of	bees,	but	mostly	because	I	like	getting	free	bees.

===== PAGE 62 =====
Property	Assessments
Probably	every	homeowner	has	wondered	how	his	or	her	local	tax	assessor
combines	information	about	the	size	of	a	house	lot,	the	floor	area	of	the	house	on
the	lot,	the	number	of	bedrooms	and	bathrooms	in	the	house,	and	so	forth	to
determine	the	assessed	value	of	a	particular	property.	I	began	wondering	the
same	thing	about	scout	bees	in	August	1974,	as	I	watched	several	scouts
scrutinizing	a	candidate	dwelling	place.	This	happened	in	the	summer	before	I
went	of	to	start	graduate	school	at	Harvard.	I	was	working	happily	for	Doc
Morse	at	Cornell’s	Dyce	Laboratory,	but	I	was	a	little	worried	about	my	choice
of	problem	for	a	doctoral	thesis:	deepening	Martin	Lindauer’s	work	on	how	a
swarm	chooses	its	home.	In	20	years,	nobody	had	tackled,	much	less	solved,	the
many	mysteries	raised	by	Lindauer’s	study.	Clearly,	there	was	a	first-rate
opportunity	here,	but	could	I	succeed	in	making	something	of	it?	To	begin	to	see
what	I	might	do,	I	decided	simply	to	watch,	with	my	eyes	wide	open,	a	swarm
go	through	its	democratic	decision-making	process.	In	working	for	Doc,	I	had
learned	how	to	make	an	swarm—by	shaking	a	colony	(queen	and	workers)	into	a
cage	
to	render	them	homeless,	and	then	feeding	them	lavishly	with	sugar	syrup
to	get	them	stuffed	with	food	like	natural	swarm	bees—so	I	prepared	a	swarm
and	set	it	up	behind	my	parent’s	house	in	Ellis	Hollow	(see	
fig.	1.7
).	I	also	nailed
a	nest	box	that	I	built	from	scrap	plywood	to	a	white	pine	tree	about	150	meters
(500	feet)	away,	hoping	the	swarm’s	scouts	would	discover	it	and	select	it	for
their	new	homesite.	I	mounted	the	box	at	eye	level	so	I	could	observe	easily	any
scout	bees	that	might	visit	it.
The	weekend	that	I	watched	this	swarm	turned	out	to	be	a	milestone	in	my

===== PAGE 63 =====
life.	The	swarm’s	scouts	quickly	began	advertising	several	prospective	homesites
with	their	dances,	and	before	long	one	bee	was	dancing	with	eye-catching	en-
thusiasm	for	a	location	nearby	and	to	the	north:	my	nest	box!	This	bee’s	lively
dance	soon	gave	rise	to	a	small	crowd	of	bees	at	the	box.	Back	at	the	swarm,	I
adorned	a	few	of	the	bees	dancing	for	my	box	with	dots	of	paint	on	the	thorax
and	abdomen,	giving	different	bees	different	color	combinations.	This	simple
trick	transformed	these	individuals	from	mere	members	of	
Apis	mellifera
	into
personal	acquaintances	whose	affairs	became	of	the	greatest	interest	to	me.	At
the	swarm,	I	saw	how	a	scout	would	perform	a	bout	of	vigorous	dancing,	contact
another	bee	with	agile	antennal	movements	to	beg	a	droplet	of	honey,	perhaps
groom	of	a	pesky	feck	of	paint,	and	then	fly	away	for	20	to	30	minutes.	When
she	returned,	she	might	dance	again	but	she	might	also	just	settle	quietly	within
the	swarm	cluster.	At	the	nest	box,	I	saw	how	my	labeled	bees	would	land	and
agitatedly	run	into	the	entrance	opening	and	then	scurry	back	out	a	minute	or	so
later,	whereupon	they	would	either	crawl	briefly	around	the	entrance	and	then
pop	back	inside	or	conduct	a	slow,	hovering	flight	around	the	box,	usually	facing
it	and	maneuvering	within	inches	of	the	box,	apparently	giving	the	nest	structure
a	detailed	visual	inspection	(
fig.	3.9
).	Never	before	had	I	seen	a	honeybee
behave	with	such	persistent	intention	to	gather	information.	I	was	thoroughly
intrigued.	Also,	my	worries	about	choice	of	thesis	topic	had	largely	vanished,	for
I	felt	confident	that	I	could	explore	how	a	scout	bee	inspects	a	site.
I	began	to	study	closely	the	inspection	behavior	of	nest-site	scouts	the
following	summer,	in	June	1975.	To	do	so,	I	had	to	leave	the	forested
countryside	around	Ithaca,	where	since	early	May	I	had	been	busy	finding	bee
trees	and	describing	natural	nests,	and	shift	to	a	location	largely	devoid	of
natural	homes	for	honeybees:	Appledore	Island	(
fig.	3.10
).	This	rocky,	wind-
blown	island	is	barely	900	meters	(half	a	mile)	long	and	lies	10	kilometers	(6
miles)	out	in	the	Atlantic	Ocean	of	the	coast	of	southern	Maine.	It	is	the	site	of
the	Shoals	Marine	Laboratory	of	Cornell	University	and	the	University	of	New
Hampshire.	I	was	attracted	to	Appledore	because	it	has	no	resident	honeybees
and	it	has	no	large	trees.	Instead,	it	is	inhabited	by	approximately	one	thousand
breeding	pairs	of	herring	gulls	
(Larus	argentatus)
	and	great	black-backed	gulls
(Larus	marinus)
,	and	it	is	covered	by	thickets	of	poison	ivy	plants	rising	three
meters	(10	feet)	tall	together	with	tangles	of	blackberry	brambles	and	wind-
battered	cherry	bushes,	all	richly	fertilized	by	the	gulls.	I	figured	that	if	I	took	a
honeybee	swarm	out	to	this	scrubby	island,	the	bees	would	have	to	concentrate
their	house	hunting	on	the	artifcial	nesting	sites	that	I	would	provide.	If	so,	then	I
could	observe	their	behavior	under	controlled	conditions	and	learn	how	they

===== PAGE 64 =====
assess	a	possible	dwelling	place.
My	first	goal	on	Appledore	Island	was	to	make	a	detailed	description	of	the
behavior	of	scout	bees	inspecting	nest	sites.	I	hoped	these	observations	would
suggest	how	scouts	evaluate	the	critical	nest-site	properties.	It	was	particularly
important	to	be	able	to	watch	scouts	inside	a	prospective	homesite	in	order	to
understand	how	they	might	measure	such	things	as	the	cavity’s	volume	and	the
entrance’s	height	from	the	cavity	floor.	To	this	end,	I	built	a	lightproof	hut	with	a
cube-shaped	nest	box	mounted	on	one	of	its	walls	(
fig.	3.11
).	The	box	was
positioned	outside	a	window	covered	with	a	red	filter	(bees	cannot	see	red	light)
so	that	I	could	peer	inside	the	box	without	disturbing	the	scouts.	The	inner
surfaces	of	the	box	bore	a	grid-coordinate	system	that	enabled	me	to	record
where	a	scout	bee	went	while	she	was	in	the	cavity.	After	setting	up	the	hut	in	a
valley	on	one	side	of	the	island,	I	positioned	a	small	swarm	(about	2,000	bees)	at
the	center	of	the	island.	The	bees	had	been	given	dots	of	paint	using	a	color	code
that	made	them	individually	identifiable.	Then	I	retired	to	the	hut	to	wait	for
scout	bees.

===== PAGE 65 =====


===== PAGE 66 =====
The	first	time	I	tried	this,	I	waited	all	morning	at	the	hut	without	being	visited
by	a	scout	bee,	which	surprised	and	dismayed	me.	When	I	returned	to	the	swarm
around	midday,	my	spirits	sank	further,	for	I	saw	several	scouts	performing	long-
lasting	dances	indicating	a	location	directly	away	from	my	hut.	Rats!	What
possibly	could	the	bees	have	found?	I	made	careful	measurements	of	the
direction	and	distance	to	the	location	specified	by	the	bees’	dances	and	plotted
the	site	on	my	topographical	map.	Now	my	spirits	sank	even	deeper,	for	the
bees’	dances	were	indicating	unmistakably	one	of	the	two	lobster	fshermen’s
cottages	on	the	south	shore	of	the	island,	specifically	Rodney	Sullivan’s	cottage
(
fig.	3.12
).	When	I	had	arrived	on	Appledore	a	few	days	before,	and	had	been
getting	oriented	to	my	new	surroundings,	I	had	been	told	to	keep	well	away	from
the	fshermen’s	private	properties,	especially	Rodney’s	place,	for	he	valued	his
privacy	and	kept	a	loaded	shotgun	behind	his	front	door.	What	should	I	do?	I
sought	advice	from	the	laboratory’s	director,	Professor	John	M.	Kingsbury,	and
he	kindly	went	with	me	over	to	Rodney’s	cottage,	to	introduce	student	Seeley	to
fisherman	Sullivan.	We	went	by	boat	so	Rodney	would	be	able	to	see	us	coming,
approaching	from	the	front	(the	water),	even	while	my	bees	were	“attacking”
from	the	rear	(the	land).	He	heard	our	boat	approach,	came	out	on	his	porch,	and
told	us	to	come	ashore.	After	we	climbed	up	the	rocks	to	his	house,	he	told	us	he
had	an	emergency:	hundreds	of	bees	were	buzzing	in	the	stovepipe	to	his
woodstove!	“Never	seen	this	before!	Could	they’a	been	blown	out	here	during
the	[recent]	storm?”	I	didn’t	answer	the	question,	but	I	did	offer	to	help.	While
Rodney	made	a	fire	in	the	stove	to	smoke	out	the	bees,	I	climbed	his	steep	roof

===== PAGE 67 =====
(slippery	with	splotches	of	fresh	gull	poop)	and	taped	window	screen	over	his
chimney	flue	to	exclude	bees	in	the	future.	Rodney	was	delighted…I	was
relieved.
No	longer	distracted	by	Rodney’s	house,	the	scouts	from	my	swarm	soon
started	to	appear	at	my	observation	nest	box	and	began	to	perform	their	striking
inspection	behavior.	I	saw	that	a	scout	bee	needs	13	to	56	minutes	(average	37
min)	to	inspect	a	prospective	nest	site.	Her	complete	inspection	is	a	summation
of	10	to	30	journeys	inside	the	cavity,	each	one	lasting	usually	less	than	a	minute
and	alternating	with	equally	brief	periods	outside,	during	which	the	bee
examines	the	exterior	of	the	nest	structure.	I	call	this	first	inspection,	when	a
scout	is	popping	in	and	out	of	the	cavity,	the	discovery	inspection.	Following	the
discovery	inspection,	a	scout	returns	to	the	swarm,	and	if	the	site	is	desirable	she
will	advertise	it	with	a	waggle	dance	and	usually	will	then	make	repeated	visits
to	the	site	at	approximately	half-hour	intervals,	but	these	subsequent	site	visits
tend	to	last	only	10	to	20	minutes	(average	13	min)	and	don’t	involve	so	much
in-and-out	activity.
When	a	scout	is	inside	a	cavity,	conducting	her	discovery	inspection,	she
devotes	most	of	her	time	(about	75	percent)	to	rapid	walking	across	the	inner
surfaces.	This	quick	pacing	about	is	interspersed	with	pauses	to	rest,	groom,	and
release	attraction	pheromones	from	the	scent	organ,	and	with	short	hopping
flights.	The	inside	of	a	dark	cavity	seems	an	odd	place	to	attempt	to	fly	about,

===== PAGE 68 =====
yet	the	bees	make	these	little	flights	that	last	less	than	a	second	and	that	move	a
bee	from	one	point	to	another	on	the	walls,	floor,	or	ceiling	of	the	cavity.	A
geometric	pattern	in	the	movements	of	scout	bees	is	that	early	in	the	discovery
inspection	a	scout	walks	primarily	near	the	entrance	during	her	journeys	inside,
whereas	later	she	penetrates	to	the	deepest	recesses	of	the	cavity	(
fig.	3.13
).
Three-dimensional	reconstructions	of	the	walking	paths	of	individual	scouts
reveal	that	when	the	inspection	is	finished,	a	scout	has	walked	60	meters	(200
feet)	or	more	around	the	inside	of	the	cavity	and	has	covered	all	its	inner
surfaces.
I	spent	four	weeks	on	Appledore	Island	in	1975,	departing	without	solving	the
mystery	of	how	scout	bees	evaluate	candidate	nest	sites.	Nevertheless,	I	felt
returned	to	the	island	in	July	1976,	I	focused	on	the	puzzle	of	how	scout	bees
can	measure	the	size	of	potential	nest	cavities,	which	are	immense	compared	to
the	size	of	a	bee.	Cavity	volume	is	the	nest-site	property	that	is	perhaps	most
critical	to	a	colony’s	long-term	survival,	since	any	colony	occupying	a	hollow	10
liters	or	smaller	cannot	store	suffcient	honey	to	get	through	winter,	so	I
suspected	the	bees	have	evolved	a	way	to	measure	cavity	volume	accurately.

===== PAGE 69 =====
How	do	scout	bees	measure	the	volume	of	a	cavity?	Their	extensive	walking
in	the	course	of	an	initial	inspection	could	provide	the	basis	for	an	estimate,	but
another	hypothesis	was	that	they	simply	go	inside	and	look	around.	I	first
performed	experiments	with	nest	boxes	in	which	I	could	vary	the	interior	light
level	(by	changing	the	amount	of	light	coming	in	through	the	entrance	hole)	and
the	traversable	surface	area	(by	coating	the	inner	surfaces	with	Fluon,	a	teflon-
type	material	that	creates	a	waxy	surface	that	bees	cannot	walk	up)	(
fig.	3.14
).	I
found	that	in	order	to	measure	a	cavity’s	volume,	scout	bees	need	either	interior
illumination	greater	than	0.5	lux	(about	the	illumination	provided	by	a	full
moon)	or	inner	surfaces	that	can	be	traversed	freely.	What	are	the	conditions
inside	a	typical	tree	cavity?	Certainly	the	wood	walls	inside	a	cavity	are	easily
traversed	by	a	scout	bee.	To	measure	the	light	level	in	cavities	of	the	sort
inspected	by	scout	bees,	I	built	a	model	based	on	the	measurements	I	had	made
of	natural	nests.	It	had	a	series	of	openings	into	which	I	inserted	a	light	meter.	I
found	the	illumination	to	be	less	than	0.5	lux	except	near	the	entrance	opening

===== PAGE 70 =====
where	some	sunlight	streams	in.	Evidently,	in	nature	scout	bees	rely	primarily	on
walking	about	in	a	prospective	nest	site	to	measure	its	volume.
To	test	this	hypothesis	more	directly,	I	tried	altering	a	scout’s	perception	of	a
cavity’s	volume	by	manipulating	the	amount	of	walking	required	to	move	from
point	to	point	inside	a	cavity.	To	do	so,	I	invented	a	bee	treadmill,	a	cylindrical
nest	box	mounted	vertically	on	a	turntable	that	enabled	me	to	rotate	the	box
smoothly	while	a	scout	bee	was	inside	(
fig.	3.14
).	By	means	of	a	window	at	the
top,	I	could	look	inside	and	see	which	way	the	bee	was	walking;	then	I	could
turn	the	walls	according	to	whether	I	wanted	to	increase	or	decrease	the	amount
of	walking	required	for	her	to	complete	a	horizontal	circuit.	So,	if	a	scout	came
in	through	the	entrance	and	I	rotated	the	walls	in	the	direction	she	walked,	she
was	carried	along	and	quickly	found	herself	back	near	the	entrance.	But	if	I
turned	
Fig.	3.14
	Experimental	apparatus	used	in	testing	how	a	scout	bee
measures	the	volume	of	a	cavity.	Left:	Apparatus	in	which	the	cavity	volume
could	be	varied	between	5	liters	(with	the	inner	lid	down)	and	2	5	liters	(inner	lid
up).	The	light	baffle	made	it	possible	to	vary	the	amount	of	light	coming	in
through	the	entrance	hole,	to	see	whether	scouts	could	measure	the	size	of	the
cavity	without	relying	mainly	on	vision.	Coating	the	interior	wall	surfaces	made
it	possible	to	vary	the	amount	of	traversable	surface	area	inside	the	box,	to	assess
the	importance	of	walking.	Right:	Apparatus	in	which	the	wall	of	the	cylindrical
cavity	could	be	rotated	to	increase	or	decrease	the	amount	of	walking	a	scout	bee
had	to	do	to	circumnavigate	the	space.	the	walls	against	her,	she	would	need	to
walk	much	longer	to	make	her	way	back	around	to	the	entrance	opening.	The
entire	device	was	mounted	in	my	lightproof	hut	with	a	short	tunnel	connecting
the	entrance	in	the	nest	box	to	an	opening	in	the	hut’s	wall.	The	only	light
entering	the	nest	box	came	in	through	its	entrance,	and	it	is	likely	that	this	bright
spot	provided	each	scout	bee	inside	the	box	with	a	visual	reference	point,	both
for	finding	her	way	out	of	the	box	and	for	monitoring	her	progress	in
circumnavigating	it.

===== PAGE 71 =====
Fig.	3.14	Experimental	apparatus	used	in	testing	how	a	scout	bee	measures	the
volume	of	a	cavity.	Left:	Apparatus	in	which	the	cavity	volume	could	be	varied
between	5	liters	(with	the	inner	lid	down)	and	25	liters	(inner	lid	up).	The	light
baffle	made	it	possible	to	vary	the	amount	of	light	coming	in	through	the
entrance	hole,	to	see	whether	scouts	could	measure	the	size	of	the	cavity	without
relying	mainly	on	vision.	Coating	the	interior	wall	surfaces	made	it	possible	to
vary	the	amount	of	traversable	surface	area	inside	the	box,	to	assess	the
importance	of	walking.	Right:	Apparatus	in	which	the	wall	of	the	cylindrical
cavity	could	be	rotated	to	increase	or	decrease	the	amount	of	walking	a	scout	bee
had	to	do	to	circumnavigate	the	space.
The	volume	of	this	experimental	box	was	14	liters,	on	the	boundary	between
an	unacceptably	small	cavity	and	a	suitably	large	one.	If	walking	contributes	to
the	perception	of	volume,	then	the	first	scout	to	discover	the	box	should	find	it
either	more	or	less	attractive	than	its	true	volume	would	merit,	according	to
whether	she	had	been	made	to	walk	more	or	less	than	she	would	in	a	normal	14-
liter	cavity.	The	assay	of	her	evaluation	of	the	box	was	the	number	of	other
scouts	she	recruited	to	visit	the	box;	she	should	recruit	more	scouts	if	she	found
the	box	suitably	large	than	she	would	if	the	box	had	seemed	unacceptably	small.
That	is	precisely	what	I	observed	in	four	trials	of	this	experiment:	seven	or	nine
recruits	in	90	minutes	when	the	bee	walked	lots,	but	only	zero	or	one	recruit	in
90	minutes	when	the	bee	walked	little.	Evidently,	only	the	bees	that	had	taken

===== PAGE 72 =====
“long	walks”	judged	the	box	sufficiently	roomy	and	recommended	it	to	their
fellow	scouts	with	enthusiasm.	It	seems	clear,	therefore,	that	a	scout’s	estimate
of	the	volume	of	a	cavity	is	proportional	to	the	amount	of	walking	she	must	do	to
circumnavigate	it.	Every	step	is	a	measurement.
Nigel	R.	Franks	and	Anna	Dornhaus,	biologists	at	the	University	of	Bristol	in
England	and	the	University	of	Arizona	in	the	United	States,	have	recently
suggested	a	simple	method	by	which	a	scout	bee	might	judge	a	cavity’s
roominess	using	the	information	gained	from	the	walking	and	flying	movements
that	she	makes	inside	the	cavity.	They	point	out	that	physicists	have	long	known
that	for	any	open	space	the	mean	free	path	length	(MFPL)	of	wall-to-wall	lines
drawn	in	all	directions	across	the	space	is	equal	to	four	times	the	volume	(V)	of
the	space	divided	by	its	internal	surface	area	(A):	MFPL	=	4V/A.	Thus,	volume
is	proportional	to	mean	free	path	length	multiplied	by	internal	surface	area:	V	=
(MFPL	x	A)/4.	It	is	possible	that	the	extensive	walks	made	by	scout	bees	are	a
means	of	estimating	a	cavity’s	internal	surface	area.	It	is	also	possible	that	the
short	hopping	flights	made	by	scout	bees—which	I	had	reported	but	had	not
linked	to	the	volume	estimation	process—are	a	means	of	seeing	how	far	they	can
fly	before	hitting	a	wall,	that	is,	a	means	of	estimating	the	mean	free	path	length.
If	both	possibilities	prove	correct,	then	it	may	be	that	all	a	scout	bee	needs	to	do
to	be	certain	that	a	cavity	is	sufficiently	spacious	is	to	ascertain	that	the	cavity
provides	a	suitable	combination	of	internal	surface	area	and	mean	free	path
length.	Certainly	the	results	of	my	experiment	with	the	rotating-wall	nest	box	are
consistent	with	this	hypothesis;	
forcing	a	bee	to	walk	farther	to	return	to	the
entrance	(thereby	increasing	the	bee’s	estimate	of	internal	surface	area?)	resulted
in	a	larger	estimate	of	the	box’s	volume.	Franks	and	Dornhaus	have	proposed	an
ingenious	experimental	test	of	their	idea,	one	that	involves	hanging	a	rigid
curtain	across	much	of	the	interior	of	a	nest	box	and	coating	the	curtain	with
Fluon	so	that	scout	bees	cannot	walk	on	it.	This	curtain	will	shorten	the	mean
free	path	length	of	flights	inside	the	nest	box	but	will	not	change	either	its
volume	or	its	walkable	surface	area.	One	can	then	see	if	the	bees	behave	as	if	the
box	has	been	shrunk.	I	hope	the	test	will	be	performed	soon,	and	that	it	will
provide	support	for	the	proposed	rule	of	thumb,	for	I	think	it’s	an	elegant
solution	to	a	tough	problem.

===== PAGE 73 =====
4
SCOUT	BEES'	DEBATE
The	experience	of	democracy	is	like	the	experience	of	life	itself—
always	changing,	infnite	in	its	variety	sometimes	turbulent
and	all	the	more	valuable	for	having	been	tested	by	adversity
—Jimmy	Carter
,	Address	to	the	Parliament	of	India,
	1978
	
	
W
hen	a	honeybee	swarm	chooses	its	future	home,	it	practices	the	form	of
democracy	known	as	direct	democracy,	in	which	the	individuals	within	a
community	who	choose	to	participate	in	its	decision	making	do	so	personally
rather	than	through	representatives.	The	collective	decision	making	of	a	bee
swarm	therefore	resembles	a	New	England	town	meeting	in	which	the	registered
voters	who	are	interested	in	local	affairs	meet	in	face-to-face	assemblies,	usually
once	a	year,	to	debate	issues	of	home	rule	and	to	vote	on	them,	rendering	binding
decisions	for	their	community.	Of	course,	there	are	differences	in	how	direct
democracy	works	between	bee	swarms	and	town	meetings.	For	example,	the
scouts	in	a	bee	swarm	have	common	interests	(e.g.,	all	want	to	choose	the	best
available	homesite)	and	they	reach	decisions	by	building	a	consensus.	The
people	in	a	town	meeting,	however,	often	have	conflicting	interests	(e.g.,	some
do	and	some	don’t	want	to	help	fund	the	town	library),	and	they	reach	decisions
by	using	the	majority	voting	rule:	each	individual	has	one	vote,	all	votes	have
equal	weight,	and	the	option	that	gets	the	majority	wins.	Another	basic
difference	between	bee	swarm	
and	town	meeting	is	that	a	scout	bee	in	a	swarm,
unlike	a	citizen	in	a	meeting,	cannot	monitor	each	exchange	within	the	group’s
debate	and	thereby	have	a	synoptic	overview	of	the	discussion.	Instead,	a	bee
can	only	observe	and	react	to	the	actions	of	her	immediate	neighbors	in	the
swarm	cluster,	hence	she	operates	without	global	knowledge	of	the	information
that	percolates	among	her	fellow	swarm	bees.

===== PAGE 74 =====
While	these	differences—common	versus	conflicting	interests	and	local
versus	global	knowledge—between	bee	swarm	and	town	meeting	are	real,	they
do	not	overshadow	several	extremely	important	similarities	between	the	direct
democracies	of	honeybees	and	human	beings.	Firstly,	in	both	the	insectan	and
the	human	forms	of	this	collective	decision	making,	each	decision	about	a	future
course	of	action	refects	the	contributions,	freely	given	and	equally	weighted,	of
several	hundred	individuals.	In	other	words,	the	control	of	the	group’s	actions	is
distributed	among	many	of	its	members	rather	than	concentrated	in	a	few
leaders.	Secondly,	because	hundreds	of	individuals	are	full	participants,	the
group	 can	 acquire	 and	 process	 information	 from	 multiple	 sources
simultaneously,	even	ones	that	are	widely	scattered.	Consider,	for	example,	the
first	stage	of	every	decision-making	process,	where	the	critical	challenge	is	to
identify	the	available	options.	By	virtue	of	having	numerous	individuals
examining	a	problem	and	presenting	possible	solutions	to	it,	both	a	bee	swarm
and	a	town	meeting	are	much	more	capable	than	any	solitary	bee	or	single
person	in	coming	up	with	a	broad	range	of	alternative	options.	And	the	broader
this	range	of	options,	the	more	likely	it	will	include	the	one	best	option.	Thirdly
and	most	intriguingly,	in	both	bee	swarms	and	town	meetings,	the	way	the	group
selects	its	course	of	future	action	is	by	staging	an	open	competition	among	the
proposed	alternatives.	An	individual	proposes	a	possible	way	forward,	each
listener	makes	an	independent	assessment	of	the	proposal	and	decides	whether	to
reject	or	accept	it,	and	those	that	accept	it	may	announce	their	own	support	for
the	proposal.	These	endorsements	often	recruit	still	more	supporters	for	this
option.	The	better	the	proposal,	the	more	supporters	it	will	attract,	and	the	more
likely	it	is	to	gain	sufficiently	broad	support	to	become	the	community’s	choice.
In	the	case	of	the	house-hunting	bees,	the	competition	among	the	supporters
of	different	proposals	is	often	fierce,	with	some	scout	bees	vigorously	champion
ing	one	lovely	tree	cavity	while	other	scouts,	just	a	few	bees	away	on	the	surface
of	the	swarm	cluster,	are	enthusiastically	advertising	a	second,	third,	or	even
fourth	desirable	dwelling	place.	(Later	in	the	chapter,	we	will	see	which	bees
take	up	the	“profession”	of	nest-site	scout	and	what	prompts	these	bees	to	step
into	this	dangerous	job.	In	a	nutshell,	nest-site	scouts	are	elderly	bees	who	were
working	as	common	foragers	but	then	quit	this	line	of	work	when	they	sensed
that	their	colony,	preparing	to	swarm,	no	longer	needed	additional	food.)	But	it	is
always	a	“friendly”	competition;	the	scout	bees	agree	on	what	makes	an	ideal
homesite,	they	are	united	in	the	goal	of	choosing	the	best	available	site,	they
share	their	information	with	full	honesty,	and	ultimately	they	reach	a	complete
agreement	about	their	new	residence.	One	valuable	lesson	that	we	can	learn	from

===== PAGE 75 =====
the	bees	is	that	holding	an	open	and	fair	competition	of	ideas	is	a	smart	solution
to	the	problem	of	making	a	decision	based	on	a	pool	of	information	dispersed
across	a	group	of	individuals.
Lindauer’s	Swarms
The	discovery	that	swarm	bees	use	debates	to	aggregate	dispersed	information
was	made	by	Martin	Lindauer	in	1951	and	1952,	when	he	received	permission
from	Karl	von	Frisch	to	use	all	the	swarms	that	emerged	from	the	hives	of	bees
kept	in	the	garden	behind	the	Zoological	Institute	at	the	University	of	Munich.
Thus,	at	last,	Lindauer	was	able	to	make	a	close	study	of	what	had	aroused	his
curiosity	back	in	the	spring	of	1949:	dirty	dancing	bees	on	the	surface	of	a
swarm	(
fig.	4.1
).	The	institute’s	bee	colonies	did	their	part,	providing	Lindauer
with	17	swarms	spread	across	the	months	of	May,	June,	and	July.	Many	of	the
swarms	few	across	the	street	to	the	Botanical	Garden	where	they	settled	on
various	objects,	and	Lindauer	charmingly	named	each	swarm	for	its	bivouac	site:
the	Linden	swarm	on	May	18,	1951,	the	Hawthorn	swarm	on	July	9,	1951,	the
Balcony	swarm	on	June	22,	1952,	and	so	forth.	His	immediate	aim	was	to
determine	whether	the	bees	dancing	on	a	swarm	are	nest-site	scouts,	but	his
ultimate	goal	was	to	understand	how	a	swarm	finds	its	new	homesite.	Knowing
the	value	of	starting	an	investigation	of	animal	behavior	with	a	“watching	and
wondering”	phase,	during	which	one	patiently	makes	broad	observations	that
can	yield	unexpected	discoveries,	Lindauer	watched	from	dawn	to	dusk	the	bees
performing	waggle	dances	on	the	surface	of	each	clustered	swarm.	Knowing	too
that	he	wanted	his	dancing	bees	to	be	identifiable	individuals,	so	that	he	could
begin	to	enter	the	world	of	a	bee	in	a	swarm,	he	applied	colored	paint	dots	to	the
back	of	each	dancing	bee.	Karl	von	Frisch	had	devised	a	marking	scheme	back
in	the	1910s	that	enables	one	to	number	bees	from	1	to	599	with	just	5	paint
colors,	and	Lindauer	used	this	system,	deftly	daubing	with	a	tiny	paint	brush	one
to	four	tiny	dots	of	shellac	paint	on	the	thorax	of	each	dancing	bee.

===== PAGE 76 =====
Lindauer’s	endeavor	to	record	the	dances	on	a	swarm	started	easily	enough,
for	few	bees	danced	and	their	dance	performances	were	intermittent.	So	at	first
Lindauer	could	record	in	his	notebook	the	time	of	each	bout	of	dancing,	the
identity	of	the	dancer,	and	what	location	this	individual	advertised	with	her
dance.	
In	time,	however,	his	task	of	recording	the	swarm	bees’	dance	activity
became	almost	impossibly	difficult;	sooner	or	later	he	faced	a	dozen	or	more
bees	dancing	simultaneously	on	the	swarm.	He	coped	with	this	overwhelming
display	of	dancing	bees	by	becoming	more	selective	in	what	he	recorded;	he
noted	only	the	time	he	saw	each	new	(not	yet	labeled)	dancing	bee	and	the
location	indicated	by	each	new	bee’s	dance.	It	was	exhausting	to	single-handedly
observe,	label,	and	record	the	dancing	swarm	bees	for	hour	after	hour,
sometimes	for	days	on	end.	But	it	was	immensely	revealing.	In	
chapter	1
,	we
saw	how	Lindauer	tested	his	hunch	that	the	bees	dancing	on	swarms	are	nest-site
scouts	advertising	potential	nesting	cavities.	He	found	that	the	site	indicated
unanimously	by	the	dancing	bees	shortly	before	a	swarm	few	to	its	new
homesite	matched	the	address	of	their	new	dwelling	place.	Even	more	marvelous
was	Lindauer'	s	discovery	that	a	swarm’s	scouts	conduct	a	vigorous	debate	to
select	their	new	home.
Figure	4.2
	shows	an	example	of	one	of	these	debates.	It	was	held	on	the	Eck
swarm,	a	swarm	that	left	its	parental	hive	at	1:35	in	the	afternoon	on	June	26,

===== PAGE 77 =====
1951,	soon	settled	in	a	privet	bush,	and	then	hung	out	there	for	nearly	four	days
while	its	scout	bees	went	about	choosing	a	dwelling	place.	On	the	first	day,
Lindauer	observed	and	labeled	just	two	dancing	scout	bees,	between	1:35	and
3:00	p.m.	One	bee	reported	a	candidate	homesite	approximately	1,500	meters	to
the	north,	while	the	other	proposed	a	second	site	300	meters	to	the	southeast.	By
3:00	p.m.	the	sky	had	filled	with	dark	rain	clouds	and	the	air	had	became	cooler,
so	the	scout	bees	ceased	their	explorations	for	the	day.	The	next	day	the	scouts
remained	inactive	until	late	in	the	morning,	when	the	clouds	parted	and	bright
sunshine	returned.	
Figure	4.2
	shows	that	Lindauer	labeled	11	new	dancers
between	noon	and	5:00	p.m.,	and	that	three	of	them	advertised	the	site	1,500
meters	to	the	north,	two	others	advertised	the	site	300	meters	to	the	southeast,
and	the	remaining	six	indicated	six	other	sites	in	various	directions	and
distances.	Clearly,	no	agreement	among	the	dancing	bees	was	reached	during
this	second	day	of	debate.	On	the	third	day,	the	weather	was	mostly	rainy	and
Lindauer	recorded	just	two	new	dancers,	both	in	late	morning.	One	advocated
the	site	to	the	north,	thereby	strengthening	this	site’s	slim	lead	among	the
dancers	(with	five	bees	total,	so	far),	and	the	other	reported	a	new	site,	about	400
meters	to	the	southwest.

===== PAGE 78 =====
On	the	fourth	day,	the	sky	cleared,	the	air	warmed,	and	the	bees	became
active.	More	than	20	new	sites	were	reported,	though	surprisingly	the	site	1,500
meters	to	the	north	did	not	receive	additional	dancers.	Lindauer	suggested	that	it
might	have	been	a	cavity	with	a	leaky	roof	into	which	rainwater	had	seeped	the
previous	day,	rendering	it	unattractive	as	a	nesting	site.	Most	of	these	20	new
possibilities	were	announced	by	just	one	dancer	each	and	so	weren’t	serious
proposals	in	the	bees’	debate,	but	a	few	did	receive	the	attention	of	multiple	bees
and	so	became	important	possibilities.	For	example,	between	9:30	a.m.	and	4:00
p.m.	nine	bees	advertised	a	site	located	1,500	meters	to	the	west.	Even	here,
however,	the	bees’	interest	eventually	faded;	from	4:00	to	5:00	p.m.,	Lindauer
recorded	no	new	dancers	for	the	western	site.	Only	one	site,	the	one	located	300
meters	to	the	southeast,	held	the	bees’	interest	all	day,	with	new	dancers	for	this

===== PAGE 79 =====
site	getting	painted	on	the	swarm	each	hour.	
Figure	4.2
	shows	that	the	rate	at
which	Lindauer	recorded	new	dancers	for	the	southeast	site	grew	gradually	over
the	day,	and	that	by	4:00	p.m.	this	site	held	a	commanding	lead.	But	it	was	not
until	the	final	hour	of	dance	activity,	between	4:00	and	5:00	p.m.,	that	the
recruitment	of	scouts	to	the	southeast	site	utterly	overwhelmed	that	to	other	sites,
with	fully	61	dancing	newcomers	advertising	the	southeast	site	and	only	two
recruiting	to	alternative	sites.	The	situation	remained	the	same	the	following
morning,	with	83	out	of	the	85	new	dancers	in	favor	of	the	southeast	site.
Finally,	at	9:40	in	the	morning	on	June	30,	this	swarm	launched	into	flight	and
few	300	meters	to	the	southeast	to	take	up	residence	in	the	wall	of	a	bomb-
damaged	building.
The	overall	pattern	that	Lindauer	reported	for	the	Eck	swarm—initially	new
dancers	appeared	on	the	swarm	indicating	various	possible	nesting	site,	then	bit
by	bit	the	new	dancers	became	concentrated	on	one	of	the	sites,	and	finally	the
swarm	few	of	in	the	direction	of	the	favored	site—proved	typical	for	the	17
swarms	he	watched.	Occasionally,	though,	Lindauer	encountered	a	swarm	where
the	debate	did	not	progress	so	smoothly.	For	example,	sometimes	the	scout	bees
would	find	two	sites	that	elicited	strong	dancing	starting	at	about	the	same	time.
In	this	situation,	both	sites	would	receive	plenty	of	fresh	recruits	and	so	new
dancers	for	both	sites	would	continue	to	appear	on	the	swarm	for	many	hours.	Of
course,	this	made	it	extremely	difficult	for	the	dancing	bees	to	reach	an
agreement.

===== PAGE 80 =====
Figure	4.3
	shows	one	example	of	how	a	prolonged	debate	arose	when	a
swarm’s	scout	bees	created	two	equal-strength	groups	of	dancers.	The	Propyläen
swarm’s	saga	began	on	June	11,	1952,	when	it	left	its	mother	hive	at	2:14	p.m.
Over	the	remainder	of	the	afternoon,	the	scouts	discovered	and	reported	on	11
sites,	one	of	which	attracted	the	greatest	number	of	dancers.	We	see	that
Lindauer	labeled	15	bees	dancing	for	a	site	some	900	meters	to	the	northeast,	but
only	14	total	for	the	other	10	sites.	So	at	first	it	looked	like	the	scouts	in	this
swarm	had	come	close	to	an	agreement	in	less	than	three	hours	of	discussion.	On
the	morning	of	the	second	day,	however,	another	group	of	strong	dancers
appeared,	with	each	of	its	members	promoting	a	site	1,400	meters	to	the
southwest.	Lindauer	reported	that	“their	dances	were	no	less	lively	and
continual,	and	for	the	observer	it	was	a	nerve-wracking	task	to	witness	the	tug-
of-war	of	these	two	dance	groups	that	dragged	on	for	two	days	with	see-sawing
prospects	for	victory.”	Throughout	the	second	day	the	appearance	of	new
dancers	for	the	northeast	and	southwest	sites	was	nearly	symmetrical,	and	it	was

===== PAGE 81 =====
not	until	late	in	the	morning	on	the	third	day,	June	13,	that	this	symmetry	began
to	break.	For	some	reason,	the	strength	of	dancing	for	the	southwest	site	must
have	weakened	slightly,	so	fewer	new	dancers	for	this	site	were	marked,	and
over	the	afternoon	the	mustering	of	new	dancers	for	the	northeast	site	surged
ahead	of	that	for	the	southwest	site:	first	25	versus	9	new	dancers	(12:00	to	2:00
p.m.),	then	41	versus	7	new	dancers	(2:00	to	4:00	p.m.),	and	eventually	34
versus	0	new	dancers	(4:00	to	5:00	p.m.).	We	see	that	by	the	end	of	the	third	day
an	agreement	had	been	reached,	but,	alas,	it	was	too	late	in	the	day	for	the	swarm
to	undertake	its	flight	to	its	new	home.	(Swarm’s	rarely	take	flight	after	5:00
p.m.,	perhaps	to	avoid	risking	a	move	without	a	long	period	of	daylight	ahead.	A
swarm’s	queen	may	need	to	make	an	emergency	landing	to	rest,	and	when	this
happens	it	can	take	the	workers	in	an	airborne	swarm	over	an	hour	to	halt	their
group	flight,	locate	their	missing	queen,	and	reassemble	around	her.)	The
Propyläen	swarm’s	delayed	decision-making	forced	it	to	stay	put	until	the	next
day,	which	turned	out	to	be	cool	and	rainy,	so	it	was	not	until	the	afternoon	of
June	15,	fully	four	days	after	the	swarm	left	its	parental	hive,	that	the	bees
finally	few	of	to	their	new	residence	in	the	northeast.


===== PAGE 82 =====
Lindauer	even	observed	one	swarm	that	failed	to	reach	an	agreement,	that	is,
there	never	arose	a	dancer	group	that	so	dominated	the	deliberations	that
Lindauer	marked	new	dancers	for	only	one	site.	It	was	the	Balcony	swarm	of
June	22,	1952	(
fig.	4.4
).	As	in	the	Propyläen	swarm,	its	scout	bees	got	into	a
balanced	competition,	with	one	group	of	dancers	advocating	a	site	600	meters	to
the	northwest	and	a	second	group	favoring	instead	a	site	800	meters	to	the
southwest.	For	four	hours	(12:00	to	4:00	p.m.)	neither	group	managed	to	gain	a
decisive	lead.	Nevertheless,	at	4:10	p.m.	the	swarm	lifted	of	and	then	did
something	that	Lindauer	could	scarcely	believe	even	though	he	was	seeing	it
with	his	own	eyes.	In	his	words,	“The	swarm…sought	to	divide	itself.	The	one
half	wanted	to	fly	to	the	northwest,	the	other	to	the	[southwest].	Apparently,	each
group	of	scouting	bees	wanted	to	abduct	the	swarm	to	the	nesting	place	of	its
own	choice.”	And	each	group	partly	succeeded,	for	half	of	the	airborne	bees
started	moving	southwest	toward	the	main	railway	station	while	the	other	half
began	trending	northwest	toward	the	Karlstrasse	(see	
fig.	1.6
).	But	neither	group
managed	to	keep	going	in	its	desired	direction,	perhaps	because	each	lacked	the
queen,	and	eventually	the	two	clouds	of	swirling	bees	reunited	in	the	air	where
they	had	started.	Then	a	remarkable	tug-of-war	between	the	two	groups	began.
Over	the	next	half	hour,	one	group	tried	again	to	advance	to	the	northwest,	going
of	100	meters	before	coming	back,	then	the	other	group	pushed	150	meters	to
the	southwest,	but	then	it	too	returned	to	the	original	site.	At	this	point	the	bees
resettled	on	the	balcony	where	they	had	previously	been	clustered.	Sadly,	the
swarm’s	queen	had	become	lost	during	the	aerial	tug-of-war,	and	over	the	next
several	hours	Lindauer	watched	the	swarm	cluster	gradually	dissolve	as	the
queenless	bees	drifted	home	to	their	mother	hive.

===== PAGE 83 =====
The	history	of	the	ill-fated	Balcony	swarm	highlights	several	features	of
honeybee	swarms	and	their	decision-making	process.	From	the	tragedy	of	the
queen’s	
loss	and	the	swarm’s	dissolution,	we	are	reminded	that	the	survival	of	a
swarm’s	queen,	who	carries	the	new	colony’s	genes	in	her	ovaries	and	her
spermathe-ca,	is	absolutely	critical	to	a	swarm’s	success.	From	the	failure	of	the
scouts	to	reach	an	agreement,	we	are	shown	how	swarms	are	not	infallible	in
their	decision	making.	Occasionally,	a	swarm	will	produce	a	split	decision,
though	usually	this	is	just	a	temporary	situation	and	the	swarm	manages	to
resolve	the	problem.	We	will	see	in	
chapter	7
	that	when	a	split	decision	arises,	a
swarm	will	normally	take	of,	fail	to	move	to	either	site,	resettle,	and	then
conduct	further	debate	leading	to	an	agreement.	Lindauer	watched	17	swarms	of
which	just	two	(the	Balcony	and	Moosacher	swarms)	produced	split	decisions.
Only	the	Balcony	swarm	never	reached	agreement,	and	this	was	because	it	lost
its	queen,	so	it	seems	clear	that	complete	failure	in	swarm	decision	making	is
rare.	Finally,	from	the	launch	of	the	Balcony	swarm	into	flight	without	prior
consensus	among	the	dancers,	we	are	given	a	strong	indication	that	dancer
consensus,	though	conspicuous	to	the	human	observer,	is	not	what	the	bees
themselves	monitor	to	know	when	they	should	switch	from	
making
	a	decision	to

===== PAGE 84 =====
implementing
	a	decision.	How	the	bees	actually	make	this	switch	will	be
revealed	in	
chapter	7
.
My	Swarms
A	great	scientific	discovery	is	one	that	gives	rise	to	shining	insights	whose	light
dispels	obscurities,	opens	up	new	paths,	and	reveals	unknown	horizons.	Martin
Lindauer	made	such	a	discovery	when	he	found	that	a	honeybee	swarm	chooses
its	future	home	through	a	debate	in	which	the	nest-site	scouts	express	their
arguments	in	waggle	dances.	He	elucidated	the	function	of	dances	on	swarms,	he
blazed	a	trail	toward	understanding	the	swarm	bees’	system	of	decision	making,
and	most	importantly	he	guided	us	into	a	whole	new	scientific	territory:
sophisticated	group	decision	making	by	nonhuman	animals.
Lindauer	was	certainly	a	pioneer	in	behavioral	biology,	and	like	all	pioneers,
the	time	and	tools	available	to	him	were	insufficient	to	explore	fully	the	new
terrain	he	had	discovered.	It	is	not	surprising,	therefore,	that	his	investigation	of
honeybee	democracy	was	incomplete	in	many	ways.	We	can	see	this	perhaps
most	clearly	in	the	way	he	was	limited	by	his	equipment	(notebook,	watch,	and
paint	
set)	to	recording	only	the	appearance	of	new	dancers	on	his	swarms.
Ideally,	he	would	have	recorded	all	the	dancers	(new	and	old)	that	appeared	on
his	swarms	during	each	stage	of	the	decision-making	process,	so	that	he	could
have	acquired	a	full	picture	of	the	dynamics	in	the	dancing	for	the	alternative
sites.	This	would	have	shown	how	the	total	number	of	supporters	for	each
proposed	site—not	just	the	appearance	of	new	supporters—changed	over	time,
and	how	in	the	end	presumably	just	one	site	was	being	advocated	by	the	dancing
bees.	The	records	shown	in	
figures	4.2
	and	
4.3
	indicate	that	shortly	before
swarms	few	away	the	winning	site	was	being	advertised	by	all	the	new	dancers,
but	these	records	don’t	tell	us	whether	in	the	end	the	winning	site	was	being
advertised	by	
all	the	dancers
,	that	is,	all	the	old	ones	and	all	the	new	ones.	Does
the	decision-making	process	in	fact	end	cleanly,	with	essentially	every	dancer
supporting	a	single	site,	the	winning	site?	Lindauer	suggested	that	it	does;	he
wrote	that	the	scouts	for	the	losing	sites	ultimately	“gave	up	their	recruitment,”
presumably	by	ceasing	to	dance,	but	he	did	not	show	that	they	stopped	dancing.
Also,	he	did	not	show	when	the	advocates	of	the	losing	sites	stopped	dancing	or
how	they	stopped	dancing.	It	would	be,	therefore,	very	informative	to	have	a
complete	picture	of	the	dancing	on	a	swarm.	It	would	also	be	extremely
desirable	to	have	complete	records	of	the	behaviors	of	individual	dancers,	so	that
one	could	track	each	dancer’s	actions	following	her	first	bout	of	dancing.	Does

===== PAGE 85 =====
she	perform	multiple	bouts	of	dancing?	Is	the	total	amount	of	her	dancing	related
to	the	quality	of	the	site	that	she	is	advertising?	And	if	she	stops	dancing,	how
does	she	decide	to	do	so?	Does	she	quit	on	her	own	regardless	of	what	is
happening	around	her,	or	only	after	encountering	another	bee	performing	a	more
vigorous	dance?	Lindauer'	s	study	is	an	amazing	frst	reconnaissance	of	how
house-hunting	honeybees	perform	their	collective	decision	making,	but	it	left
unanswered	countless	questions	about	the	rules	of	procedure	that	nest-site	scouts
follow	when	conducting	their	deliberations.
In	1996,	I	decided	to	tackle	these	questions.	This	was	nearly	20	years	after	I
had	finished	my	PhD	thesis	research	on	the	nest-site	preferences	of	honeybees
and	the	way	they	estimate	the	volume	of	a	prospective	nest	cavity.	Why	hadn’t	I
started	addressing	the	gaps	in	Lindauer'	s	work	back	in	the	mid	1970s?	It	was
because	I	didn’t	see	how	I	could	get	the	video	recording	equipment	that	I	knew
I’d	need	to	go	beyond	Lindauer's	analysis	of	swarm	decision	making.	In	those
days,	
a	color	video	camera,	recorder,	and	monitor	(they	were	all	separate	units
back	then)	cost	many,	many	thousands	of	dollars,	a	price	that	far	exceeded	the
budgets	of	the	small	grants	I	could	get	as	a	beginner	scientist.	So	I	changed	the
focus	of	my	research,	but	without	abandoning	the	topic	of	how	social	animals
make	collective	decisions.	Rather,	I	switched	to	studying	another	form	of
collective	decision	making	by	the	bees:	how	a	honeybee	colony	wisely	deploys
its	foragers	among	the	kaleidoscopic	array	of	flower	patches	in	the	surrounding
countryside.	This	is	a	different	sort	of	collective	choice,	for	whereas	a	homeless
swarm	makes	a	“consensus	decision”	about	which	
single	option
	(candidate	nest
site)	it	will	choose,	a	foraging	colony	makes	a	“combined	decision”	about	how
to	allocate	its	foragers	among	
multiple	options
	(candidate	food	sources).	I	was
attracted	to	the	puzzle	of	colony	decision	making	about	forager	allocation	partly
because	it	looked	fundamentally	similar	to	nest-site	choice—being	based	on
competition	among	groups	of	dancing	bees	advertising	different	options	(food
sources	rather	than	nest	sites)—and	partly	because	it	looked	more	tractable	than
nest-site	choice.	Swarming	is	an	ephemeral	phenomenon	that	lasts	at	most	a	few
days,	whereas	foraging	goes	on	all	summer	long.	So	for	about	15	years	I
explored	with	pleasure	how	the	bees	in	a	hive	work	together	as	a	unified	whole
in	gathering	their	food,	especially	how	they	wisely	distribute	themselves	among
flower	patches.	In	1995	I	summarized	this	body	of	research	in	a	book,	
The
Wisdom	of	the	Hive
,	and	with	this	behind	me	I	looked	forward	to	resuming	my
exploration	of	collective	decision	making	in	honeybee	swarms.
The	starting	point	was	clear.	I	should	obtain	a	complete	record	of	the	scout
bees’	dances	throughout	a	swarm’s	choice	of	its	new	home	in	order	to	get	a	full

===== PAGE 86 =====
picture	of	how	a	debate	among	scout	bees	unfolds.	This	broad	description	of	the
scout	bees’	behavior	at	the	swarm	would	fill	the	gaps	in	the	description	provided
by	Lindauer,	and	probably	would	also	yield	important	discoveries,	as	indeed	it
did.	Unlike	Lindauer	40	years	before,	or	myself	20	years	before,	I	now	had
sophisticated	video	recording	and	slow-motion	playback	equipment	that	made	it
possible	to	build	a	comprehensive	record	of	the	scout	bees’	dance	activity.	Also,
I	now	knew	how	to	label	thousands	of	bees	for	individual	identification	with
plastic	color-number	tags	glued	on	the	thorax	and	paint	marks	placed	on	the
abdomen	(
fig.	4.5
),	a	skill	that	I	had	honed	in	my	studies	of	honeybee	foraging.
With	each	bee	in	a	swarm	so	labeled,	I	figured	that	it	should	be	possible	to	trace
each	individual’s	history	of	dancing	throughout	the	decision-making	process.
Success	in	this	project	would	require,	however,	a	formidable	amount	of
painstaking	labor.	Thousands	of	bees	had	to	be	individually	labeled	for	each
swarm,	the	swarm	and	video	equipment	had	to	be	tended	throughout	each
swarm’s	choice	of	a	home,	and	the	information	about	each	dance	(the	dancer’s
ID,	the	site	being	advertised,	and	the	dance’s	duration)	had	to	be	extracted
manually	from	the	video	recordings.	It	was	my	immense	good	fortune	to	be
joined	in	this	endeavor	by	Susannah	Buhrman,	an	extremely	bright	and
indefatigable	undergraduate	student	at	Cornell.	She	proved	an	indispensable
partner	in	this	project.	Working	together	throughout	the	summer	of	1997,	we
achieved	success.

===== PAGE 87 =====


===== PAGE 88 =====
Susannah	and	I	eavesdropped	on	the	deliberations	among	the	scout	bees	on
three	swarms,	and	we	obtained	a	complete	record	of	the	dances	performed	for
each	swarm’s	decision	making.	
Figure	4.6
	shows	the	debate	recorded	on	Swarm
1,	which	was	set	up	at	10:00	a.m.	on	June	19.	We	see	that	nest-site	scouts	started
reporting	discoveries	between	1:00	and	3:00	p.m.	and	that	by	the	end	of	the	
day
seven	candidate	nest	sites	(A–G)	had	been	raised	for	consideration,	though	none
of	these	had	elicited	enthusiastic	support.	The	next	day	the	scout	bees	were
livelier.	By	midday,	four	additional	sites	(H–K)	had	been	entered	into	the
discussion	and	three	sites—G	(2,200	meters	to	the	southeast),	H	(2,600	meters	to
the	east),	and	I	(4,200	meters	to	the	south)—had	received	endorsements	by
multiple	dancing	bees.	Site	G	appeared	to	be	developing	a	lead,	for	nine	bees
had	advertised	it,	but	no	site	was	yet	dominant	in	the	dancing.	The	situation
changed	markedly	between	12:00	and	2:00	p.m.	Now	site	I	rose	to	prominence,
supported	by	23	out	of	the	25	dancing	bees.	This	situation	persisted	for	the
remainder	of	the	afternoon,	though	still	two	more	possibilities	(sites	L	and	M)

===== PAGE 89 =====
were	presented	and	the	dancing	bees	showed	support	for	sites	K,	L,	and	M	as
well	as	site	I	until	the	end	of	the	day.	The	next	morning,	however,	there	was	a
clear	consensus	among	the	dancing	bees	in	favor	of	site	I,	and	at	9:10	a.m.	the
swarm	took	of	and	few	to	the	south,	no	doubt	with	site	I	its	destination.
The	debate	on	Swarm	1	proceeded	in	a	manner	reminiscent	of	what	Lindauer
described	for	his	Eck	swarm.	During	the	first	half	of	the	decision-making
process,	the	scouts	reported	numerous	candidate	sites	located	at	various
directions	and	distances	from	the	swarm	cluster.	Then,	in	the	second	half	of	the
debate,	the	dances	of	the	scout	bees	quickly	and	smoothly	became	focused	on
just	one	site.	Ultimately,	there	was	virtual	unanimity	among	the	dancing	bees,
and	the	swarm	moved	to	the	agreed-upon	site.	It	is	worth	stressing	that	
figure	4.6
depicts,	for	each	time	interval,	the	number	of	
total
	dancers	for	each	site,	not	just
the	number	of	
new
	dancers	for	each	site.	We	can	be	confident,	therefore,	that	the
conclusion	of	this	swarm’s	decision	making	was	marked	by	a	real	consensus
among	the	dancing	bees.
The	most	interesting	scout	bee	debate	that	Susannah	and	I	observed	occurred
in	our	Swarm	3;	in	this	one	there	was	a	strong	competition	between	two	groups
of	dancers,	and	for	many	hours	it	was	unclear	which	faction	would	emerge
victorious	(
fig.	4.7
).	This	swarm	was	set	up	at	2:30	p.m.	on	July	19,	but	it	was
not	until	the	middle	of	the	next	day	that	scout	bees	started	advertising	potential
nest	sites	with	their	dances.	Six	sites	(A–F)	were	announced	between	11:00	a.m.
and	1:00	p.m.,	one	of	which	(site	A,	2,200	meters	to	the	east)	quickly	developed
a	strong	lead	with	eight	dancing	bees	promoting	it.	Over	the	next	four	hours
three	more	possible	home	sites	(G,	H,	I)	were	entered	into	the	discussion,	and
four	sites	(A,	B,	D,	G)	received	strong	consideration,	each	being	advertised	by
several	bees.	Site	A,	though,	was	losing	its	initial	lead	as	sites	B	(900	meters	to
the	south)	and	site	G	(1,400	meters	to	the	southwest)	gained	more	and	more
support.	Between	3:00	and	5:00	p.m.,	only	four	bees	danced	for	site	A,	whereas
17	bees	danced	for	site	B	and	10	did	so	for	site	G.	At	5:00	p.m.	it	seemed	that
the	contest	among	dancer	groups	on	this	swarm	was	still	wide	open.	This
situation	changed	dramatically	during	the	remaining	two	hours	of	dance	debate
that	day,	for	although	bees	performed	dances	for	seven	sites	during	these	last	two
hours,	including	two	new	sites	(J	and	K),	only	sites	B	and	G	received	the	support
of	multiple	dancing	bees.	Susannah	and	I	could	see	that	the	supporters	of	these
two	sites	had	managed	to	gain	wide	leads	over	the	bees	promoting	the	other	nine
sites,	and	we	made	bets	on	whether	the	B	group	or	the	G	group	would	prevail	the
next	day.	I	bet	on	site	B	and	Susannah	on	site	G.	Whoever	would	win	the	bet
would	be	treated	to	a	triple	scoop	ice	cream	cone	at	the	new	Ben	and	Jerry’s	in

===== PAGE 90 =====
Ithaca.
The	tension	was	high	the	next	morning.	We	arrived	at	the	lab	shortly	after
sunrise,	got	our	recording	equipment	set	up	before	the	scout	bees	could	resume
their	debate,	and	waited	eagerly	to	see	who	would	win	our	little	bet.	For	the	first
two	hours,	7:00	to	9:00	a.m.,	we	both	remained	hopeful,	because	both	sites	were
being	advertised	by	about	a	dozen	dancing	bees.	Starting	around	9:00	a.m.,
though,	my	optimism	began	to	ebb,	for	the	dancers	supporting	Susannah’s	site	G
began	to	build	a	commanding	lead	over	those	for	my	site	B,	with	32	versus	17
bees	respectively	between	9:00	and	11:00	a.m.,	and	20	versus	4	between	11:00
and	11:54	(when	it	started	raining).	Somehow	the	site	G	bees	had	managed	to
overwhelm	those	for	site	B.	The	rain	continued	throughout	the	afternoon,	during
the	night,	and	until	about	8:00	a.m.	the	next	day.	The	scout	bees	resumed