

===== PAGE 1 =====
communicationsbiology Review article
A Nature Portfolio journal
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-07608-9
A review of quorum-sensing and its role in
mediating interkingdom interactions in
the ocean
Check for updates
Megan Coolahan & Kristen E. Whalen
Quorum sensing,ﬁrst described in marine systemsﬁve decades ago, is a well-characterized chemical
communication system used to coordinate bacterial gene expression and behavior; however, the impact
of quorum sensing on interkingdom interactions has been vastly understudied. In this review, we examine
how these molecules mediate communication between bacteria and marine eukaryotes; inﬂuencing
processes such as development, disease pathogenesis, and microbiome regulation within marine
ecosystems. We describe the varied mechanisms eukaryotes have evolved to interfere with bacterial
quorum sensing signaling, the crucial role these signals play in host-virus interactions, and how their
exchange may be governed by outer membrane vesicles, prevalent in marine systems. Here, we present a
dynamic portrayal of the impact of quorum sensing signals beyond bacterial communication, laying the
groundwork for future investigations on their roles in shaping marineecosystem structure and function.
Global biogeochemical cycling and marine ecosystem dynamics are dictated
by molecular-level chemical exchanges between marine organisms1.O f t e n ,
this chemical communication is orchestrated by bacteria, which secrete
small diffusible quorum sensing (QS) signals 2 that induce density-depen-
dent, population-wide changes in microbial behavior and community
composition
3. These self-produced chemical signals accumulate locally
within the environment and attain con centrations that activate the tran-
scription of genes critical for ﬁtness4. Since the initial observation of cell
density-dependent luminescence inVibrioﬁscheri over ﬁfty years ago5,o u r
understanding of the diversity of the q uorum sensing lexicon and factors
controlling the expression of these molecules has expanded signiﬁcantly. At
the most rudimentary level, the molecular circuitry of quorum sensing relies
on one or more synthase genes, which encode the production of the dif-
fusible signal termed an autoinducer, and one or more receptors, which
dictate transcription, including the synthesis of the signal itself
6,7.V a r i o u s
classes of QS signals have been identi ﬁed in marine bacteria. These signals
are characterized by their ability to diffuse from the producing cell, be
recognized by a receiving cell, elicit a response in the receiver that has co-
evolved alongside signal producti on in the producer, and confer mutual
beneﬁts to both producer and receiver cells
4.
Acyl homoserine lactones (AHLs, au toinducer-1/AI-1), alkylquino-
lones (AQs), and α-hydroxyketones (cholera autoinducer-1/CAI-1) con-
stitute the main classes of QS compounds in marine ecosystems 8 (Fig. 1).
AHLs are the most abundant QS molecules in marine systems, produced by
Gram-negative bacteria from representatives ofAlpha-, Beta-a n dGamma-
Proteobacteria. More controversial, however, is the inclusion of furanosyl
borate diesters (autoinducer-2/AI-2)in this group, as not all bacteria that
produce AI-2 either have the sensor or trigger a response to AI-2 consistent
with canonical QS systems
8. Some believe AI-2 can be at times either a
signal, a cue, or metabolic byproduct u sed opportunistically for signaling
depending on the bacterial producer or receiver4,9,10. Similarly, tropodithietic
acid (TDA) might fall into this autoinducer category as well, possessing
some, but not all QS signal properties
11. The production of TDA is density-
dependent and induces transcription of tda genes which coincide with
bioﬁlm formation12. Expanding the vocabulary of QS molecules further, one
could append this list to include the signal peptide arbitrium (Fig. 1). This
peptide-based communication systemused by viruses that infect bacteria is
analogous to QS in bacteria13. Arbitrium-based signaling depends on the cell
density-dependent accumulation of ph age-encoded signaling molecules,
which regulate host gene expression to promote a shift from lysis to lyso-
geny, thereby enhancing the long-term survival and propagation of the viral
population within the host community.
QS-molecules are widespread among marine bacteria and are struc-
turally diverse, yet together comprise a “language” allowing bacteria to
behave collectively as a group. While the role of QS signaling in bacterial
communication is well-established
8, the exploration of QS molecules ’
potential in mediating a wealth of ce llular behaviors at the interkingdom
level is still in the early stages 14. Intricate recognition mechanisms between
bacteria and eukaryotic cells may occur when host cells detect bacterial
signals or when an autoinducer acts on the host cell without regulation
15.
Numerous studies in mammalian systems have identi ﬁed targets for QS
signals including nuclear receptors (aryl hydrocarbon receptor and per-
oxisome proliferator-activated receptor), G-protein coupled receptors, Toll-
like receptors, transcription factors (NF-κB), protein kinases (p38 and p42/
Department of Biology, Haverford College, Haverford, PA, USA.e-mail: kwhalen1@haverford.edu
Communications Biology|           (2025) 8:179 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

===== PAGE 2 =====
44 kinases), cytoskeletal protei ns, and cell-surface lipid domains 16.T h e s e
targets broadly modulate processes like innate immune responses, lipid
metabolism, inﬂammatory responses, cell structure, and intracellular cal-
cium (Ca² ⁺) signaling pathways (reviewed in ref. 14). In contrast, fewer
studies have identiﬁed QS receptors in terrestrial plants. Notably, G-protein
coupled receptors inArabidopsishave been shown to be activated by AHLs,
resulting in root elongation
17,18. These studies in mammalian systems and
terrestrial plants highlight the co mplexity of interkingdom QS between
bacteria and eukaryotic host cells, and provide an excellent starting point for
exploring cognate interkingdom QS receptors and associated regulatory
pathways in marine eukaryotes. In this review, we examine the ability of
bacterial QS signals to in ﬂuence marine eukaryotic organisms, providing
hosts with chemical contextual cues required for initiating developmental or
physiological changes to enhance hostﬁtness under distinct environmental
conditions. Furthermore, the presence of QS signals could trigger cross-
kingdom recognition, thereby allowing eukaryotic hosts to take stock
of their bacterial consortia and respond by producing their own small
molecules. The interdependence between hosts and their associated
bacteria covers a spectrum of ecologica l interactions, from cooperative to
competitive (Fig. 2). Here, we explore the emerging evidence that QS sig-
nals play a pivotal role in shaping c o-evolutionary re lationships in
marine systems.
Marine ecosystems provide an opportunity to explore the multi-
faceted roles of QS signals and autoinducers. These molecules act as a
shared molecular language understood by both bacteria and eukaryotes,
conveying vital information and directing foundational processes within
marine environments. In this review, we aim to provide insight into the
role of QS signals as drivers of eukaryotic ﬁtness and determinates of
trophic interactions in marine systems. Indeed, the long co-evolutionary
relationship between microorganisms and their hosts has enabled marine
eukaryotes to colonize all ocean habitats by forming holobionts
19— an
emerging concept that views a eukaryotic host and its associated
microbes as a single collective organism 20. Given the essential role of the
holobiont in host biology and the widespread presence of QS signals in
marine bacteria, the in ﬂuence of interkingdom signaling on host evolu-
tion merits further exploration.
Recent advances in our understanding of marine host-bacteria inter-
actions illustrate how molecules imp licated in bacterial QS contribute to
disease progression, developmental trajectories, and the modi ﬁcation of
marine eukaryotic physiology with examples from marine invertebrates
21,22,
macroalgae23,24, and phytoplankton25,26. Within marine ecosystems, eukar-
y o t e sb o t he n g a g ei na n di n t e r f e r ew i t hQS processes, actively participating
in QS-mediated dialogs by producing compounds or proteins that disrupt
bacterial QS signaling
22,27. Mechanisms to disrupt QS systems are classi ﬁed
as either quorum quenching (QQ) molecules, which enzymatically degrade
QS signals, or quorum sensing inhibitors (QSI), which interfere with QS
signaling by competitively binding to QS molecule receptors on the bacterial
cell surface
28 or by inactivating autoinducer synthases29. The production of
these molecules implies that host-driven modulation of bacterial QS signals
may have evolved as a mechanism for eukaryotes to regulate the compo-
sition of their associated microbial communities
22,27.
Interactions between marine viruses and microbes dictate the ﬂow
and fate of carbon in marine ecosystems. Viruses are the most abundant
biological entities in the oceans, outnumbering bacteria by 10-fold, with
the majority being bacteriophages — viruses that speci ﬁcally target and
infect bacteria
30. Emerging research now reveals how QS molecules are
inﬂuencing bacteriophage success. QS molecules provide critical infor-
mation about bacterial population size, enabling phages to make lysis-
lysogeny decisions by monitoring QS molecules. Likewise, viruses are
responsible for mortality of ~20% of the oceanic photosynthetic biomass
daily
31. Recent work has uncovered a novel mechanistic role for a bac-
terial QS signal in mediating viral success within its phytoplankton host 25,
offering insight into a complex tri-trophic interaction governed by QS
compounds.
The rapid loss of QS compounds from their source due to diffusion or
ﬂuid ﬂow in the ocean poses a major challenge to maintaining effective
concentrations. Many chemical-media ted interactions are sustained by
physical contact between the microbe and host, or in specialized host
anatomical structures
32.A d d i t i o n a l l y ,b i oﬁlms produced by bacterial con-
sortia act as sorptive sponges, trapping and concentrating organic
molecules
33. Another important mechanism involves outer membrane
vesicles (OMVs), which play a critical role in both stimulating and
H2N
HO
O
N
H O
H
N
O
N
H
NH
HN NH 2
O
H
N
O
N
H O
OH
Ser-Ala-Ile-Arg-Gly-Ala
N
H
O
S
S
O OH
O
O
B-
OO
CH3
OHHO
OH
OH
O
OH
O
O
OO
H
N
O
O
O
H
N
OH O
O
OH
N
HHQ
TDA
CAI-1
AI-2
arbitrium
3-OH-C14-HSL
C6-HSL
3-oxo-C4-HSL
O
O
O
HO
H
N
p-Coumaroyl-HSL
Alkylquinolone familyCAI-1 family
AI-2 family
Viral peptides
AHL family
QS-adjacent
family
Fig. 1 | Diversity of autoinducer molecules produced by marine representatives.
The acylated homoserine lactone (A HL) family of QS signals with repre-
sentatives including 3-oxo-C4-HSL ( N-3-oxo-butyryl-L-homoserine lactone),
C6-HSL ( N-hexanoyl-DL-homoserine lactone), 3-OH-C14-HSL ( N-3-hydro-
xytetradecanoylhomoserine lactone). p-Coumaroyl-homoserine lactone
(p-coumaroyl-HSL) is a representative aryl-HSL in which the acyl side chain
is replaced with p-coumaric acid moiety. The cholera autoinducer-1
(CAI-1, (S)-3-hydroxytridecan-4-one) family is produced only in Vibrio
species. The autoinducer-2 (AI-2) family containing furanosyl-borate diester.
The alkylquinolone family of QS signals including 2-heptyl-4-quinolone
(HHQ). Finally, the QS-adjacent represent atives including tr opodithietic acid
(TDA) and the viral peptide arbitri um encoded by the phage phi3T which
infects Bacillus subtilis.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-07608-9 Review article
Communications Biology|           (2025) 8:179 2

===== PAGE 3 =====
distributing QS molecules. The packaging of QS signaling molecules into
OMVs by Gram-negative bacteria appears to be more widespread in marine
systems than previously recognized. This delivery system not only preserves
the integrity of the signal during transport but also enables targeted delivery
to speciﬁc sites via receptor-mediated processes. Considering the profound
inﬂuence of QS signals on aquatic ecosystems and the wide range of hosts
they affect, there is a pressing need for further investigation into how these
signals shape interkingdom interactions in marine environments.
QS-mediated interactions between marine inverte-
brates and their associated bacteria
Secondary metabolites produced by invertebrates and their associated
microbes structure marine populations, communities, and ecosystems.
These chemical cues dictate key processes in the life of an invertebrate,
including predator-prey interacti ons, habitat selection, and larval
settlement
34. Building on the rich body of work dedicated to the chemical
ecology of marine invertebrates 34,35, new research has revealed that QS
molecules are an understudied yet essential component of the relationship
between marine invertebrates and their microbiota
21,22,27.
The interplay between QS signaling and QS inhibition is a key deter-
minant of disease pathogenesis in marine invertebrates 21,36–39.T h e
ubiquitous detection of QS signals in the microbial consortia of corals
afﬂicted with Black Band Disease40, suggests QS systems likely play a role in
Black Band Disease communities41. QS signals alone can induce disease in
coral by promoting growth of pathogen ic bacteria that overtake the bene-
ﬁcial coral microbiome 21,42, suggesting that QS compounds are a driving
factor affecting host microbiome composition. When N-hexanoyl-DL-
homoserine lactone (AHL), a quor um-sensing molecule produced by
marineVibriopathogens43, was applied to healthyAcropora cervicorniscoral
fragments, all samples exhibited tissue loss and died completely within ﬁve
days21.T h i s ﬁnding suggests that quorum- sensing signals can trigger
commensal bacteria to become opportunistic pathogens.
QS-induced diseases can be prevented by exogenous addition of
QSI36,42 or QQ molecules that inhibit pathogenic growth and induction of
virulence21,39,44. A growing body of evidence demonstrates invertebrates,
including sea anemones, holothuria ns, and coral mucus, harbor bacteria
capable of producing QSI/QQ as defensive agents against pathogen
colonization45,46. However, pathogens can also use QSIs to disrupt the
microbiome and induce disease by ob structing the QS signaling mechan-
isms of bene ﬁcial microbes 41.T h i sp h e n o m e n o ni se x e m p l iﬁed by the
cyanobacterial pathogen associat ed with coral Black Band Disease.
Although typically found in low abu ndance in healthy corals, once the
Viral attachment/entry
CRISPR-Cas immunity
Lysis-lysogeny decisions
Microbiome composition
Population growth
Physiological impacts
Evasion from viral mortality
QS mimics
Development
Disease pathogenesis
Microbiome composition
Settlement
O
O
NH
RO
Quorum quenchingenzymes
Arbitrium
signalin
g peptides
O
O NH
R
O
O
O
NH
R
O
O
O
Br
Br
NH
O
HN
O
NH
O
N
N
(1)
(3)
(2)
(4)
(4)
(4)
Disease pathogenesis
Microbiome composition
Spore attachment/germination
Biofilm formation
QS interference
Fig. 2 | Overview of chemical cross-talk driven by quorum sensing signals lib-
erated by bacteria in marine ecosystems.Here, we showcase the diversity of roles
initiated by QS molecules and the consequences of these chemically-mediated
interactions on marine invertebrates, macroalgae, phytoplankton, and viruses. For
example, the quorum sensing alkylquinolone 2-heptyl-4-quinolone (HHQ) (1)
arrests cell division, targets the inhibition of pyrimidine biosynthesis, and protects
the coccolithophore Emiliania huxleyifrom virus-induced mortality. Moreover,
lumichrome (2), a derivative of the vitamin ribo ﬂavin, is a QS mimic whose release
by exponentially growing E. huxleyiinitiates antibiotic production in commensal
bacteria, a likely strategy to thwart bacterial invaders. QS molecules can signal an
impending viral threat to the community and coordinate the reduced expression of
cell surface receptors critical for viral entry, and the induction of CRISPR-Cas
systems to acquire immunity during viral invasion. Conversely, the viral peptide
arbitrium, which is generated by bacteriophages during bacterial host infection,
serves as a communication signal within the viral population, helping to determine
the fate of the host cell. In the macroalgae Delisea pulchra, halogenated furanones (3)
competitively inhibit acyl-homoserine lactone (AHL) (4) signalling, thereby con-
trolling the bacterial species composition and halting AHL-induced virulence in
macroalgal pathogens. The interaction between QS signalling and QS inhibition
plays a crucial role in the progression of development and disease in marine
invertebrates. Image credit: jenesesimre/ stock.adobe.com.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-07608-9 Review article
Communications Biology|           (2025) 8:179 3

===== PAGE 4 =====
disease takes hold, the cyanobacterialpathogen is thought to actively shape
the disease community by cultivatin g an environment for opportunistic
pathogens to attack the coral host. It does so in part by producing the
secondary metabolite lyngbic acid, which inhibits QS signaling by blocking
CqsS, the receptor for the hydroxyketone signal CAI-1. This blockade likely
results in the modi ﬁcation of the microbiome composition
41.Am e t a g e -
nomics analysis of bacterial communi ties associated with bleached and
unbleached corals indicated pathoge nicity-associated QS genes encoding
for key proteins in bioﬁlm formation, adhesion, and infection, and virulence
genes were signi ﬁcantly increased in bleached corals 29.F u r t h e r m o r e ,
researchers discovered that genes encoding molecules involved in
quenching or inhibiting QS signals, annotated as QQ, decreased in bleached
corals. These genes were negatively associated with the presence of virulence
genes, suggesting that the interplay between QS/QQ and virulence could be
a critical tipping point for the onset of disease in corals
29.
These ﬁndings contribute to an ongoing paradigm shift in our
understanding of disease emergence inmarine holobionts, whereby disease
is not caused by exposure to a single pathogen but rather an overall
imbalance, or dysbiosis,in microbiome composition that can be activated by
QS signaling
20,47,48. Dysbiosis may result from the QS-mediated activation of
virulence by commensal bacteria that are usually present in the microbiome
at low abundances and become opport unistic pathogens when the host
experiences physiological stress
21,29. Consequently, native probiotic bacteria
lose their competitiveness, leading to changes in structure and function of
complex host-associated communities, opening up the door for disease to
gain a foothold 29,49. By identifying genes regulated by QS/QQ commu-
nication systems that drive comple x interactions among the holobiont
members, potential strategies for interventions can be developed to thwart
disease establishment in corals. More broadly, understanding QS-mediated
interactions between invertebrates and their bacterial pathogens is critical to
monitoring physiological stress in m arine holobionts in the context of a
changing ocean.
The impact of QS and QQ signaling o n marine holobionts is further
exempliﬁed by the emerging role of microbes in invertebrate development
50.
The moon jellyAurelia auritamodulates its production of QQ compounds to
selectively inhibit the QS signaling of bacterial colonizers at different devel-
opmental timepoints,ﬁnetuning the composition of the microbiome for each
developmental stage22,51. The jelly’s enhanced QQ defense against bacteria in
the larval ephyra stage may serve as a protective shield for the offspring,
preservingﬁtness and ensuring their continued developmental progression to
reproductive medusa
22. Furthermore, A. auritapolyps and ephyrae express
QQ enzymes at different levels in re sponse to commensal and pathogenic
bacteria, as commensal bacteria induce a decrease in QQ expression while
pathogenic bacteria lead to activation of the host’sQ Qr e p e r t o i r et oe l i m i n a t e
the invader. Understanding how conﬂict or cooperation is controlled via QQ
and QSI strategies in these invertebrate-associated microbiomes can further
elucidate how microbial taxa drive host development andﬁtness.
QS-mediated interactions between macroalgae and
bacteria
The role of QS signaling in mediating interactions between macroalgae and
bacteria was ﬁrst established by foundational studies in the red alga Delisea
pulchra, which produces halogenated furanones that competitively inhibit
AHL signaling52. Located in vesicles at the algal cell surface 53,h a l o g e n a t e d
furanones may act as gatekeepers that control which bacterial species can
colonize the algal cell, allowing the host to determine the composition of its
associated bacterial community23.S p e c iﬁcally, furanones inhibit signaling
by covalently modifying and inacti vating the AI-2 producing enzyme
LuxS52,54,55. This control over microbiome composition enhances algal
defense against disease by preventing host colonization by opportunistic
pathogens and inhibiting AHL-induced virulence of resident bacteria23.F o r
example, halogenated furanones signiﬁcantly reduce algal susceptibility to
bleaching23, a lethal disease caused by AHL-induced virulence of two bac-
teria native to the D. pulchra microbiome56,57. By controlling bacterial
colonization through theinterference with QS systems, algae can ameliorate
the deleterious effects of bacterial pathogens58.
The production of QS inhibitory compounds 59–62 or extracts63–68 with
inhibitory activity has been documented for several other macroalgal spe-
cies, suggesting that QS inhibitio n is a widespread mechanism used by
macroalgae to control microbial community composition and evade disease
by QS-sensing pathogens. The seagrass Halodule pinifolia produces
4-methoxybenzoic acid which inhibits QS-mediated virulence factor pro-
duction and suppresses both QS-medi ated virulence gene expression and
production of extracellular polymeric substances required for bio ﬁlm for-
mation in the pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa
60. The brown alga
Laminariaproduces the microbicidal compound hypobromous acid, which
rapidly and speciﬁcally reacts with acyl homoserine lactones. Deactivation
of these QS signals inﬂuences bioﬁlm development and may therefore serve
as an additional strategy fo r controlling biofouling59. The sodium alginate
oligomer OligoG CF-5/20, produced byLaminaria,a c t sa saQ Sa n t a g o n i s t ,
leading to the reduction of AHL synthesis via the interference of expression
of both las and rhl QS systems, resulting in altered bioﬁlm architecture and
reduced virulence factor production 61. Red algal representatives produce
betonicine,ﬂoridoside, and isethionic acid believed to inhibit the production
or reception of AHLs62.B o t hN-benzyl cinnamamide andα-resorcylic acid
isolated from the red alga Gracilaria ﬁsheri interfere with AI-2 mediated
bioluminescence in Vibrio harveyi, hypothesized to bind to either the
receptor or autoinducer of the AI-2 system 69. Polyphenolic phlorotannins,
derived from brown algae, are most notable for their function as herbivore
deterrents, digestive inhibitors, and antibacterial agents in marine
ecosystems
70. These compounds were also fou nd to inhibit QS activity in
QS-sensing violacein reporter strains, accompanied by a decrease in viru-
lence factor production, bioﬁlm formation, and QS molecule production71.
Production of QS inhibitory compounds is not limited to the macro-
algal host. Members of the macroalgal holobiont including fungi 24,72 and
epibiotic bacteria73,74 produce QS-inducing, QQ, and QSI compounds,
including a recently discovered class of α-hydroxy γ-butenolides that
structurally resemble host-produced halogenated furanones72.Q S I sf r o m
t h em a r i n ef u n g u sPenicillium inhibit virulence factors and bio ﬁlm pro-
duction via competitive binding to receptor proteins including LasR and
PqsR inP. aeruginosa. This binding likely results in a conformational change
causing the loss of downstream QS-mediated gene transcription
75–77.F u n g a l
production of these QSIs is enhanced by the presence of QS-inhibiting
bacteria, hinting at layers of chemical complexity underlying the interac-
tions between macroalgae-associated microbes. QS inhibition by epiphytic
fungi and bacteria is essential for ho st-microbiota equilibrium and pre-
vention of dysbiosis leading to macroalgal disease
24,72.B yr e g u l a t i n g
microbial community composition within the macroalgal holobiont, QS-
mediated dialogs maintain the health of coastal marine habitats that depend
on macroalgae for primary production and habitat formation
23.
Bacterial bioﬁlms play a signi ﬁcant role in the development of mac-
roalgal communities78. The ability of representatives from green and red
algae to perceive QS signals, albeit through an unknown mechanism, is
more widespread than previously recognized and could be an important
trait contributing to their ecological success
58. Finding the ideal substrate for
settlement is critical for benthic organisms and this process is often medi-
ated by infochemicals. Zoospores of the green seaweed Ulva (= Enter-
omorpha) stimulate attachment only in the presence of bio ﬁlm strains that
produce AHLs, compared to strains lacking quorum sensing circuits VanIR
and VanMN
79. The sensing of AHLs by zoospores results in a calcium inﬂux
into the cells, reducing their swimmi ng rate and leading to their accumu-
lation at the bioﬁlm surface for settlement80. Paradoxically, the presence of
AHLs was demonstrated to reduce Ulva zoospore germination and early
growth, suggesting that AHLs are a cue to slow growth algal rate lessening
metabolic burden and thereby enhan cing survival in nutrient limiting
conditions81. For the red epiphytic alga Acrochaetiumsp., life cycle com-
pletion strongly depends on AHL-producing bacteria. Spore release was
stimulated by AHLs in a dose-dependent manner and blocked when using
AHL-receptor-blocking halofuranones
82. The molecular mechanisms
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-07608-9 Review article
Communications Biology|           (2025) 8:179 4

===== PAGE 5 =====
underlying the reported ecological f unctions of cross-domain signaling
between bacteria and seaweeds requi res further investigation to fully
understand the algal receptors and pathways involved in QS molecule
reception.
QS-mediated interactions between phytoplankton and
bacteria
Interactions between phytoplankton and bacteria have been recognized as
the foremost interkingdom relatio nship in the marine environment 83,84.
These interactions propel glo bal biogeochemical cycles 1, structure the
foundation of marine food webs85, and contribute to the regulation of global
climate86. Phytoplankton account for nearly half of global photosynthetic
output87, and as much as half of the carbon they produce is eventually
consumed by heterotrophic bacteria 88. In exchange for the provision of
carbon, bacteria provide phytoplankton with essential micronutrients and
vitamins, while also acting as direct c ompetitors for inorganic nutrients84.
This dynamic relationship is mediated by chemical signals, which induce
shifts between mutualism and parasitism based on the physiological state of
each partner
89,90. QS signals are emerging as a crucial part of chemically
mediated microbial interactions that control phytoplankton population
growth
25,26. Given the widespread presence of phycosphere isolates from
phytoplankton blooms with QS-producing capabilities 11,91–93,f u r t h e r
research is needed to explore how QS compounds can in ﬂuence phyto-
plankton community dynamics, and, conversely, how algal metabolites can
impact bacterial QS-mediated signaling.
Within the phycosphere, a region immediately surrounding individual
phytoplankton cells where microscale chemical exchanges occur94,Q Ss i g -
naling drives interkingdom communication between the host and its
microbial assemblage, ultimately determining the composition of the host’s
colonizers
19. QS signals modulate bioﬁlm formation and bacterial motility95,
both necessary for initial attachment of bacterial cells within the phyco-
sphere. QS signals produced by phyt oplankton promote a switch from a
free-living mode to a surface-attached lifestyle, initiating the selective
colonization of the phycosphere by QS -responsive cells and triggering the
enhancement of bio ﬁlm formation and reduced motility. Two bacterial
symbionts adapted to thrive off diatom metabolites, Sulﬁtobacter pseudo-
nitzschiaeF5 andPhaeobactersp. F10, possess AHL synthesisluxI-like genes
adjacent to the transcriptional regulator luxR gene. Both species show
enhanced bioﬁlm formation and reduced mobility in the presence of AHLs
produced by diatom symbionts. An AHL-induced phenotype supporting
enhanced attachment effectively retains these bacteria in the phycosphere,
ensuring their success relative to other competitors
96.T h er e l i a n c eo nQ S
molecules of phycosphere residents to initiate a switch from free-living to
phycosphere-associated is favorable in those species with dependence on
phytoplankton exudates. Simultaneously, there is growing evidence that
bacterial density alone is not the sole trigger of QS expression; rather,
eukaryote metabolites can trigger QS processes
97,98.E v e na m o n gp h y c o -
sphere residents that can switch phyt oplankton hosts, the initiation of QS
production is not universal and is likely the result of a diversity and diver-
gency in the labile metabolites pro duced by different phytoplankton
species99. Future studies identifying the phytoplankton metabolites
orchestrating quorum sensing expression will assist in our understanding of
co-evolutionary cross-talk and metab olic alliances sustaining bacteria-
phytoplankton partnerships in the ocean.
There is also evidence that the diatom hostAsterionellopsis glacialiscan
release rosmarinic acid, a QS mimic functionally similar to homoserine
l a c t o n e s .T h i sm o l e c u l em a ys e r v ea sas i g n a lt op r o m o t eal i f e s t y l es h i f tf r o m
free-living to phycosphere-enabledsymbionts by suppressing motility and
encouraging the attachme nt of bacterial symbionts
100. Rosmarinic acid,
w h i c hi sa l s op r o d u c e db yl a n dp l a n t s ,h a sb e e ns h o w nt ob i n dt oQ S
regulators101. In vitro assays found rosmarinic acid was capable of binding to
the QS-regulator RhlR of P. aeruginosa(PAO1), competing with the QS
signal N-butanoyl-homoserine lactone andactivating RhlR-mediated gene
transcription. The use of QS mimics that promote attachment of beneﬁcial
bacteria while simultaneously suppressing opportunists demonstrates an
innate ability of phytoplankton to cu rate their microbial consortia, with
parallels seen in higher eukaryotes.
Quorum sensing bacteria are not restricted to a particular type of
phytoplankton-bacteria interaction; rather, representatives are ubiquitous
among phycosphere members11. Metagenomic sequencing across the stages
of a natural phytoplankton bloom has shed light on QS-mediated dynamics
of the microbial consortia in associat ion with their phytoplankton hosts.
During a bloom of the harmful algal species Gymnodinium catenatum,Q Q
sequences, including lactonases and acylases, were most dominant during
the peak stage of the bloom, which coincided with the lowest bacterial
abundance
92. Further research is needed to determine whether deploying
QQ at the height of the bloom provides symbiotic bacteria with a compe-
titive advantage to maintain a foothold within the phycosphere. Additional
studies using bioreactors to simulate shifts among dominant phytoplankton
species have shown that phycosphere bacterial communities are dominated
by QS/QQ-producing members, particularly within the attached microbial
consortia
102. Alongside autoinducer production genes, these consortia
possess functional genes regulated by QS signals, such as those linked to
antibiotic activity and iron acquisition— traits that impact both bacterial and
host ﬁtness. Although complex to interpret, further studies employing
network analysis could uncover patterns of co-variation among autoinducer
production, regulated functional genes, QQ enzymes, and host responses in
natural populations, supporting the view that QS systems are integral to
phytoplankton bloom dynamics and microbial consortia transitions.
Bacteria also regulate microalgal nutrient acquisition
103,104 and popu-
lation size using QS signals. These QS compounds have growth-enhancing
or -inhibiting effects that can be eliminated by a change in a single functional
group on the molecule 25,26. Studies of Trichodesmium bacterial consortia
indicate that QS signals coordinate the acquisition of phosphorus, an
important nutrient in oligotrophic waters, by regulating alkaline phospha-
tase activity in Trichodesmiumcolonies
104. QS molecules also modulate the
growth and nitrogenase activity of the ﬁlamentous cyanobacteriumAna-
baena sp., which produces an acylase capa ble of inactivating long-chain
AHLs as a possible defense strategy against bacteria communication103.Q S
m o l e c u l e sm e d i a t et h e i re f f e c t st h r o u g hv a r i o u sm e c h a n i s m s .F o re x a m p l e ,
2-heptyl-4-quinolone (HHQ) induces cellular stasis — meaning neither
growth nor mortality— in the coccolithophore Emiliania huxleyi
25.L o n g -
chained AHLs (C14-HSL) promoted growth in the benthic diatom Semi-
navis robusta,w h i l eN-3-hydroxytetradecanoyl homoserine lactone (OH-
C14-HSL) and N-3-oxotetradecanoyl homoserine lactone (oxo-C14-HSL)
inhibited growth26. The production of dimethysulfoniopropionate (DMSP)
is associated with the phycosphere of phytoplankton cells, where higher
nutrient concentrations exist compared to the surrounding water column.
When grown in the presence of DMSP, an organosulfur osmolyte produced
by phytoplankton, the bacterium Ruegeria pomeroyiproduces N-(3-oxo-
tetradecanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone concomitant with differential
expression of intra- and extracellular metabolites
105. These DMSP triggered
QS signal-mediated changes in gene expression lead to the release of
metabolically high-value biosynthetic intermediates useful in cross-feeding.
Production of these interme diates is thought to switch R. pomeroyito a
cooperative lifestyle with other bacteria and phytoplankton. The episodic or
strategic release of metabolites by p hytoplankton can cue QS-mediated
changes in bacteria metabolism to allow for scenarios favoring a mutually
beneﬁcial exchange of high-value metabolites.
Additionally, QS molecules can activate algicidal activity in commensal
bacteria that retaliate agai nst their phytoplankton hosts
106,107.T h i si s
demonstrated by the phycosphere isolateBacillus subtilis(strain JA) against
the alga Alexandrium minutum108, and by the bacterium Ponticoccus sp.
against its host alga Prorocentrum donghaienseas well as two other red tide
microalgae, Phaeocystis and Alexandrium109. Bacterial production of algi-
cidal compounds has previously b een described as a response to host
senescence that allows bacteria to quickly access the carbon produced by the
dying algae before ﬁnding a new host 90. Speci ﬁcally, Phaeobacter gallae-
ciensisis able to sense the physiological state ofE. huxleyiby the liberation of
p-coumaric acid, a degradation productof algal lignin released by senescing
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-07608-9 Review article
Communications Biology|           (2025) 8:179 5

===== PAGE 6 =====
cells, and induce the up-regulation of algal degrading roseobacticides90.
Interestingly,p- c o u m a r i ca c i ds e r v e sa sap r e c u r s o rf o rp-coumaroyl-HSL
(p-C-HSL) (Fig. 1), a non-fatty acyl homoserine lactone recently identiﬁed
as a potential quorum sensing signaling molecule 110.T h i sd i s c o v e r y
broadens the repertoire of QS signals and highlights a potential co-
evolutionary relationship between the algal host and the p-C-HSL-produ-
cing bacterium. During E. huxleyi’s exponential phase, Phaeobacter gal-
laeciencisprovides the alga with growth inducers like auxins and produces
the potent broad-spectrum aut oinducer antibiotic TDA to ﬁght algal
pathogens111–113 in return for the sulfur source DMSP114,115.T h ep r o d u c t i o n
of semiochemicals associated with different life stages of the phytoplankton
host may convey information about p hycosphere nutrient availability10.
Therefore, QS signaling or the acquisition of QS-precursors may represent
another strategy by which bacteria manipulate algal population dynamics to
maximize access to host-derived nutrients.
On the cellular and molecular level, QS compounds fundamentally
restructure phytoplankton morphology and gene expression.E. huxleyicells
exposed to nanomolar concentrations of the QS molecule HHQ exhibit
increased lipid storage, nuclear envelope disintegration, and changes in
chromatin structure. These morphological effects in lipid storage and DNA
replication parallel the transcript ional changes induced by HHQ, which
involve differential expression of genes involved in lipid metabolism, DNA
repair, and cell cycle regulation
25,26. In our attempts to understand how QS
molecules are sensed by phytoplankton, the growth promoting molecule
C14-HSL enhanced the expression of intr acellular signaling transcripts in
the diatom S. robusta. These transcripts include genes containing motifs
found in receptor-like kinases, G-protein coupled receptors, receptor-type
guanylate cyclases, and protein kinase domains — all of which initiate
eukaryotic signaling networks
26. Conversely, oxo-C14-HSL exposure in S.
robusta led to the downregulation of cell cycle genes, induced a switch to
increased fatty acid degradation, and caused photoprotection mechanisms
to be induced in concert with the down-r egulation of photosynthetic genes
involved in light harvesting
26. These studies offer the ﬁrst look into the
complex web of molecular interacti ons that QS molecules trigger in phy-
toplankton, as revealed through the lens of gene transcription. The recent
discovery that the alkylquinolone, HHQ is a potent inhibitor of dihy-
droorotate dehydrogenase, an enzyme involved in pyrimidine biosynthesis
in the coccolithophore Emiliania huxleyi, establishes a novel avenue
through which QS molecules shape algal physiology and further suggests an
intimate co-evolutionary relationship between the algal host and QS signal
producing bacterium
116. Building on these foundational transcriptomic and
enzymatic studies, metabolomic proﬁling is poised to reveal whether bac-
teria use QS signals to induce algal production of speci ﬁc metabolites,
allowing bacteria to “farm” their phytoplankton hosts.
Phytoplankton are not only passive r ecipients of bacterial QS signals.
Globally abundant microalgal species such as Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii117, Phaeodactylum tricornutum118,a n dE. huxleyi119 are known to
produce the QS mimic known as lumichrome, which was found to stimulate
the LasR receptor from P. aeruginosa. Docking studies indicate that lumi-
chrome and its precursor riboﬂavin are both recognized in the AHL binding
pocket of LasR 120. Lumichrome induces the production of antibacterial
compounds by Vibrio spp., thereby protecting the phytoplankton from
bacterial pathogens119. QS mimics like lumichrome and riboﬂavin therefore
represent another mechanism by which marine eukaryotes manipulate
bacterial QS signaling through LasR-like receptors to prevent host disease or
modulate the phycosphere community. The production of QS mimics is a
promising yet understudied area of research, and future studies may reveal a
diversity of currently unknown QS-modulating compounds produced by
marine phytoplankton.
Throughout their co-evolutionary history, phytoplankton and their
bacterial symbionts have likely reliedon mutual exchanges of infochemicals
to guide their decision-making. Algal metabolites serve as metabolic sign-
posts, allowing bacteria to assess the host ’s physiological state and trigger
metabolic shifts that favor mutual nutrient exchange. QS systems evolved to
detect and respond to phytoplankton cues, altering bacterial gene expression
to promote a transition from a free-livi ng to a particle-associated lifestyle
that beneﬁts both partners. In turn, phytopla nkton hosts likely developed
structural QS mimics to encourage this lifestyle shift, gaining protection
through the bacterial production of antibiotic compounds that ward off
pathogens. Other algal metabolites evo lved to silence QS signaling, likely
fostering speciﬁc mutualistic or commensal rel ationships within the phy-
cosphere community. Meanwhile, bacteria in ﬂuence host ﬁtness by
deploying QS signals that activate algicidal activities, enabling them to
exploit dying phytoplankton. These QS-mediated interactions highlight the
intricate co-evolutionary complexity of bacteria-phytoplankton relation-
ships. Future work aimed at identifyi ng key bacterial and algal infochem-
icals, mapping their regulatory targets with host and QS pathways, and
elucidating their downstream physiological effects on both bacteria and
phytoplanktonﬁtness will help decode the molecular circuitry shaping these
fundamental marine interactions.
Impacts of QS signaling on host-virus dynamics
Viral infection of marine microbes drives nutrient cycling and governs
microbial community composition in the oceans 31. Viruses are the most
numerous biological entities in the ocean and nearly 20% of primary pro-
ductivity is turned over daily due to viral infection. While host-virus
dynamics operate at global scales to in ﬂuence carbon and nutrient cycling,
recent investigations have highlighted how chemical communication stra-
tegies operating on the molecular level similar to bacterial QS systems
inﬂuence viral strategy. These signaling mechanisms allow viruses to
manipulate host bacterial communi cation pathways to optimize lysis-
lysogeny strategies
121,122. Chemical signaling is a pivotal aspect in the con-
tinuous evolutionary struggle betw een viruses and their bacterial hosts,
whereby bacteria evolve new antiviral protection methods while viruses
develop strategies to bypass these defenses
123. In the course of a billion years
of evolution, viruses that infect bacteria, termed phage, have developed the
ability to monitor the number of uninfected bacteria in a population using
QS signals or similar compounds used in microbial communication. This
unique capacity gives phage a strateg ic advantage, allowing them to toggle
their infection trajectory depending on the number of nearby infection
attempts
121.
QS compounds are a signi ﬁcant component of bacterial defenses
against viral attack. The density-dependent nature of QS signaling provides
critical information about bacterial population density that allows bacteria
to weigh the costs and beneﬁts of different antiviral defense strategies
124.Q S
molecules can disrupt viral attachmentby downregulating the expression of
bacterial cell surface receptors used for viral entry124–126.F o re x a m p l e ,E. coli,
which does not produce AHLs itself, reduces the numbers of LamBλ phage
cell surface receptors in response to AHLs, resulting in a 2-fold reduction in
the adsorption of phage. This reduc tion in turn increases the number of
survivingE. colicells. This protective cascade of events is dependent on the
presence ofE. coli’s AHL receptor SidA, and not a secondary side effect due
to the presence of AHLs manipulating the media environment. However,
downregulation of these receptors is energetically costly since the receptors
are involved in key cellular functions, such as nutrient acquisition and
motility
124. The density-dependence of QS signaling allows bacteria to
downregulate these critical recepto rs only in high-density populations
where virions released by infected cells are most likely to infect another
host
124. Given that phage, once thought to have narrow host speciﬁcity, can
adapt to new hosts at high rates, this strategy also beneﬁts those bacteria that
eavesdrop on QS signals rather thanproducing QS signals themselves127.Q S
signaling can therefore steer bacterial populations toward the most effective
antiviral defense strategy and allow populations to adapt to dynamic
infection landscapes
126.
QS molecules also fortify antiviral defenses in bacteria by inducing
coordinated expression of the CRISPR-Cas immune system, which allows
bacterial populations to acquire immunity against a diverse range of possible
invaders
128,129. This diversity within the collective immune system of a
population is essential for antivira l defense because viruses can develop
resistance to CRISPR-Cas through a single point mutation 128,130. However,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-07608-9 Review article
Communications Biology|           (2025) 8:179 6

===== PAGE 7 =====
CRISPR-Cas expression is costly to the host since autoimmunity can cause
the CRISPR-Cas system to target the host genome itself 128,131,132. Therefore,
the density-dependent nature of QS signaling again functions to ensure that
CRISPR-Cas is only triggered in high-density bacterial populations most at
risk of viral infection128,129,133.
Viruses have already co-opted nu merous facets of the bacterial QS
system to gain an advantage in the coevolutionary arms race 122.V i r u s e s
possess genes encoding bacterial QS molecules 134 as well as membrane
receptors that bind QS compounds135, suggesting that viruses can listen to
and participate in QS-mediated bacterial communication. Detection of QS
signals allows eavesdropping viruses to determine the density of a bacterial
population, a key factor in ﬂuencing the shift between lysis and
lysogeny135,136. For example, vibriophages encode a receptor speci ﬁct ot h e
autoinducer 3,5-dimethylpyrazin-2-ol, a QS compound produced byVibrio
cholerae135. Binding of 3,5-dimethylpyra zin-2-ol to the v ibriophage-
encoded QS receptor and transcription factor (VqmA phage)s i g n a l sah i g h
bacterial-host cell density to the p hage, triggering the lytic pathway 135.
Presently, the speciﬁc cue that activates vqmAphage expression is unknown.
However, it is hypothesized that a low-level production of VqmA Phage is
triggered in response to an environmental stimulus or unstable state. Viral
recognition of QS compounds may induce either a lytic or lysogenic life
cycle in different phage-bacteria systems
135–138, based on the distinct
advantages provided by lysis versus lysogeny to the virus135,139.A sak e yf o r m
of information used by viruses in ma king lysis-lysogeny decisions, QS
molecules are a fundamental determinant of the fate of virally infected
bacterial populations and, therefore,a central element shaping the structure
of marine microbial communities.
Further exemplifying the dynami c coevolutionary relationship
between viruses and bacteria, phage have developed their own QS-like
system of small molecule communication, known as arbitrium. This system
requires three phage genes to produce the signal peptide, serve as a receptor,
and regulate lysogeny
13. Arbitrium involves the use of small peptide sig-
naling molecules released by phage-infected bacteria as a message for future
phages infecting the same bacterial population. The concentration of these
peptides indicates the number of previous viral infections in the population,
and if at sufﬁcient titer, indicates a signiﬁcant number of the host cells in the
population may already have been lysed. This leaves few remaining hosts for
new viral progeny released through a l ytic program, and shifts infection
dynamics to a lysogenic model to avoid the risk of new progeny phage
lacking a host to infect
13. Therefore, a high concentration of the signaling
peptides during later stages of infection increases the probability of lysogeny
over lysis for a new phage entering the population. When modeled, phage
using small-molecule signals as deter minates of the switch in lytic versus
lysogenic lifestyles were found to ou tcompete non-communicating phage,
particularly when host densities become low
140. Subsequent to the discovery
of the ‘arbitrium’QS system, an additional host-derived QS system in the
Bacillus phage phi3T genome was discove red (Bernard et al. 2021). This
system downregulates host defense mechanisms during infection when cell
stress or cell abundance is high and phage titer is low, making it the ﬁrst
known virus with two communication repertoires141. The evolution of the
arbitrium system and others demonst rates that phage have not only imi-
tated but also improved on the bacterial QS model by innovating a mole-
cular mechanism to facilitate transmission of information across different
generations about prior infection events
13.
Finally, the story of how QS molec ules impact viral success gains
additional complexity as we investigate tripartite interactions between a
eukaryotic host, a virus, and bacterially-derived QS signals. Pollara et al.
2021 demonstrated that the coccolithophore E. huxleyilikely gains pro-
tection against viral mortality throug h QS signal-mediated physiological
remodeling of the eukaryotic host. Ph ytoplankton cells exposed to nano-
molar concentrations of the alkylquinolone HHQ, however, were still sus-
ceptible to viral infection by E. huxleyivirus, but displayed a signi ﬁcantly
reduced burst size, or the total number of viral particles release per host cell,
when compared to controls
142. Subsequent work identiﬁed HHQ as a potent
inhibitor of E. huxleyi dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, a fundamental
enzyme catalyzing the fourth step in pyrimidine biosynthesis and a known
antiviral drug target 116.T h i s ﬁnding established a novel avenue through
which a bacterial QS molecule can shape algal physiology and revealed
fundamental insights into ecologically signiﬁcant tripartite interactions in
the phycosphere.
Role of membrane vesicles in transport of QS
molecules
Critical to understanding how QS molecules mediate interkingdom com-
munication is describing the cellula r processes of infochemical exchange
between organisms. Perhaps most vital is the question of how hydrophobic
QS molecules are transferred at sufﬁcient concentrations through aqueous
environments
143,s u c ha st h eo c e a n .Ac o m p e l l i n gs o l u t i o nt ot h i sp r o b l e mi s
the transport of QS compounds within lipid-bound outer membrane
vesicles (OMVs) that shield the h ydrophobic QS compounds from the
aqueous environment
143. Gram-negative bacteria securely secrete QS signals
and other products to their intended targets using OMVs, formed when the
bacterial outer membrane buds and internalizes cargo
144. In marine eco-
systems, the concentration of OMVs in oligotrophic waters are approxi-
mately 10
5/mL145. OMVs are widespread throughout marine systems145,a n d
the transport of QS molecules within OMVs has been reported in marine
bacteria
146,147, suggesting that OMVs may be a signi ﬁcant yet understudied
mechanism of infochemical exchange in the oceans. The transport of QS
signals within OMVs is dictated by c omplex feedback loops in which QS
molecules and products of QS-regulat ed pathways are transported within
OMVs and regulate the formation of the vesicles themselves
143,148,149.
Investigating the interconnections between QS signaling and OMVs is a
promising area of future work that may provide key insights into the
mechanisms of infochemical exchange in the oceans.
OMVs as vessels for QS delivery regulate many of the same fundamental
processes controlled by QS signaling, including bacterial pathogenicity, host-
virus dynamics
150, and eukaryotic development151. OMVs are integral to the
QS-mediated dysbiosis that causes coral disease150,a sc o r a lp a t h o g e n sa r e
known to produce OMVs containing AHLs and other virulence-related
proteins
147. The information-trafﬁcking function of OMVs has also been
exploited by viruses, using phage receptors and small RNAs as OMV cargo to
propagate infection in bacterial and eukaryotic host populations 152,153.B y
facilitating the transfer of phage receptors between cells in a bacterial popu-
lation, OMVs can induce short-term susceptibility to viral infection in pre-
viously resistant bact erial subpopulations153.O M V sa l s om e d i a t ev i r a l
infection of phytoplankton cells, as infected cells release OMVs containing
small RNAs that extend viral half-life i n the extracellular environment and
increase the rate of viral infection 152,154. Viruses have therefore evolved the
ability to hijack the host’s OMV machinery to accelerate viral infection of a
population150. However, OMVs deliver more than just bad news to eukaryotes,
as they also function as carriers of critical information required for eukaryotic
development. For example, the Hawaiian bobtail squid (Euprymna scolopes)
uses OMVs produced by its symbiotic bacterium Vibrio ﬁscheri as a key
checkpoint required to indicate successful bacterial colonization before the
induction of irreversible light organ morphogenesis151. Considering the well-
established role of QS signals in inducing bioluminescence ofV.ﬁscheriwithin
the squid light organ 155, the emerging importance of OMVs in this host-
microbe symbiosis highlights the signiﬁcant interconnection between OMVs
and QS signals as a key area for future study.
Summary and outlook
A vast expansion is underway in our u nderstanding of QS signaling in the
oceans, revealing that quorum sensi ng is a crucial mechanism of inter-
kingdom signaling through which bacteria shape eukaryotic development,
physiology, and ultimately ﬁtness (Fig. 2). In tandem, eukaryotes produce
metabolites that can be recognized by bacterial QS receptors and serve as
interkingdom signals. Moreover, euk aryotes have evolved the ability to
eavesdrop on bacterial QS conversations, and can respond by using QQ and
QSI compounds to circumvent bacter ial community dynamics and mod-
ulate the composition of their associated microbiome (Table 1). These
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-07608-9 Review article
Communications Biology|           (2025) 8:179 7

===== PAGE 8 =====
Table 1 | Processes mediated by interkingdom QS signaling
General Process Signal/Molecule Target Organisms and Speci ﬁc Role(s) References
Development QQ enzymatic degradation of AHL and AI-2 molecules Aurelia aurita(moon jellyﬁsh)
Regulation of microbiome composition based on
developmental stage
22
AHL Ulva (Enteromorpha) sp. (green alga)
Spore liberation, attachment, and germination
80,81,158,159
Hydroides elegans(marine polychaete) andBalanus
improvises (barnacle)
Settlement
160,161
Disease pathogenesis or
interference in QS signaling
AHL Acropora cervicornis(coral)
Regulation of microbiome composition– pathogenic vs
beneﬁcial bacteria
21,36
Pocillopora damicornis(coral)
Regulation of microbiome composition– pathogenic vs
beneﬁcial bacteria
42
QQ degradation of AHL Artemia salina(brine shrimp) andVenerupis philippinarum
(Manila clam)
Virulence of pathogenic bacteria
39
Production of acylases with QQ activity inAnabaena sp.
(ﬁlamentous cyanobacterium)
162
Nitzschia cf pellucida(diatom)
Haloperoxidase inactivation of AHLs
163
Gymnodinium catenatum(dinoﬂagellate)
Production of lactonases and acylases
92
N-benzyl cinnamamide andα-resorcylic acid (inhibition
of AI-2 signaling)
Gracilaria ﬁsheri (red macroalgae)
Bind to either receptor or autoinducer in AI-2 system
69
Lyngbic acid (inhibitor of CAI-1 signaling) Roseoﬁlum reptotaenium(cyanobacteria)
Inhibition of QS signaling via CqsS receptor in beneﬁcial
bacteria
41
Halogenated furanones (inhibitor of AHLs) Delisea pulchra(red alga)
Virulence of pathogenic bacteria
23,56
4-Methoxybenzoic acid Halodule pinifolia(seagrass)
Inhibits QS-mediated virulence gene expression, bioﬁlm
formation and virulence factor production
60
Hypobromous acid Laminaria sp. (brown macroalga)
Deactivates AHLs impacting bioﬁlm formation
59
Sodium alginate oligomer OligoG CF-5/20 Laminaria sp. (brown macroalga)
QS antagonist due to interference with Las and Rhl QS
systems; reduced bioﬁlm formation and virulence factor
production
61
Betonicine, ﬂoridoside, isethionic acid, and
phlorotannins
Various red and brown macroalgal representatives
Inhibit production or reception of QS signals
62,71
Microbial community
composition
AI-2 Ascophyllum nodosum, Pelvetia canaliculata, Laminaria
digitata, and Saccharina latissima(brown algae)
Regulation of microbiome composition; prevention of
dysbiosis
24
QQ degradation of AHL Hydra vulgaris(hydroid)
Regulation of microbiome composition
27
TDA Phaeobacter gallaeciencis(bacterium) producer as a broad-
spectrum antibiotic to prevent algal pathogens ofEmiliania
huxleyi (coccolithophore)
111–113
Rosmarinic acid (QS mimic) Asterionellopsis glacialis(diatom)
Signal to surface-associated lifestyle switch by bacterial
symbionts
100
Lumichrome (QS mimic) Phaeodactylum tricornutum(diatom) andEmiliania huxleyi
(coccolithophore)
Recognized by LasR; induces antibiotic production in
Vibrio spp.
118–120
Dimethysulfoniopropionate (DMSP) General organosulfur osmolyte produced by marine
phytoplankton
Triggers QS signal-mediated changes in bacteria gene
expression; switch to cooperative lifestyle
105
Population growth & cell
physiology
AHL Seminavis robusta(diatom)
Cell cycle regulation; Lipid metabolism
26
104
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-07608-9 Review article
Communications Biology|           (2025) 8:179 8

===== PAGE 9 =====
sophisticated interkingdom interactions between bacteria and eukaryotes
likely have evolved to favor symbiotic exchanges between partners or
mitigate deleterious interactions with eukaryotic hosts that deploy mimics
or signal curtailing mechanisms as a defense strategy. With a diversity of key
players in interkingdom QS signaling now identi ﬁed, interrogating the
molecular and biochemical mechanismsunderpinning these interactions is
needed to fully understand the role of QS-mediated communication in the
marine environment. What speciﬁc biochemical pathways do QS molecules
target to manipulate eukaryotic met abolism and physiology? What cell
surface receptors or transcription factors are shared between QS-producing
bacteria and QQ/QSI-producing eukaryotes that facilitate chemical com-
munication between these organisms? What are the regulatory mechanisms
that dictate how QS signals modulate viral reproduction strategies in
response to host cell density and physiological state? Answering these
questions will vastly expand our understanding of the microscale cellular
interactions shaped by QS signaling that dictate marine community
dynamics.
A major gap in our current understanding of QS signaling is how
environmental conditions and host physiological state affect the production
of QS compounds in natural systems. To provide a complete picture of the
biotic and abiotic factors that impact QS signaling, future work must expand
the study of QS signaling beyond the laboratory setting, using novel ﬁeld-
based methods to accurately probe and quantify the presence of QS com-
pounds in natural systems. Laboratory studies have placed fundamental
limits on our understanding of marine QS signaling, as only a small subset of
marine bacteria are ultimately cultivable in the laboratory setting. Fur-
thermore, determining ecologically relevant concentrations of QS molecules
for use in laboratory research is challenging because measurements of bulk
seawater do not accurately represent the concentration of QS signals in the
distinct microenvironment surro unding microbial cells or in bio ﬁlms.
Accurate quantiﬁcation of QS molecules necessitates innovative experi-
mental methods leveraging emerging technologies, such as live bacterial
biosensors that use ﬂuorescent reporters to detect QS compounds. These
approaches can enhance our underst anding of the spatial and physical
heterogeneity of QS molecule gradients experienced by organisms at the
microscale. Ultimately, such technologies will help determine the effective
“range” of infochemicals in situ within marine ecosystems. Additionally,
the use of micro ﬂuidics can allow us to precisely control ﬂow and QS
gradients to examine physiological r esponse at the level of single cells
156.
Furthermore, while laboratory studies have hinted at the synergistic
effects of QS-inhibiting signals pro duced by the co-culturing of marine
microbes, it is essential to prioriti ze examinations of natural systems
to comprehensively delineate the spectrum of interactions between QS-
producing marine microorganisms and the biological entities that
Table 1 (continued) | Processes mediated by interkingdom QS signaling
General Process Signal/Molecule Target Organisms and Speci ﬁc Role(s) References
Trichodesmium (cyanobacterium)
Increase in alkaline phosphatase activity
Anabaena sp.( ﬁlamentous cyanobacterium)
Modulating growth and nitrogen metabolism
103
Tetramic acids; resulting from the rearrangement via
Claisen-like condensation reaction of 3-oxo-AHLs
Phaeodactylum tricornutum(diatom)
Decrease in photosynthetic efﬁciency; growth inhibition
164
2-heptyl-4-quinolone (HHQ) Emiliania huxleyi(coccolithophore)
Cell cycle regulation; DNA repair; Lipid metabolism; Viral
mortality; Pyrimidine biosynthesis
25,116,142
Phaeodactylum tricornutum(diatom)
Obstructs photosynthetic electron transport via inhibition of
cytochrome b
6f complex; inhibition of mitochondrial
respiration lowering ATP levels
165
Regulation of algicidal
activity
AHL Ponticoccus sp. (bacterium) againstProcentrum
donghaiense (dinoﬂagellate)
109
AI-2 Bacillus subtilis(bacterium) againstAlexandrium minutum
(dinoﬂagellate)
108
p-Coumaric acid resulting from algal lignin degradation;
precursor ofp-coumaroyl-HSL
Emiliania huxleyi(coccolithophore)
Stimulation of the production of algaecides (troponoids) by
Phaeobacter gallaeciencis
90
p-Coumaric acid (or other phenylpropanoids) and 3-OH-
C10-HSL (AHL)
Emiliania huxleyi(coccolithophore)
Induction of roseobacticide-speciﬁc genes andtda operon
to produce algaecides (roseobacticides) byPhaeobacter
inhibens
166
Viral attachment/entry AHL Escherichia coliand phageλ 124
Vibrio anguillarumand phage KVP40 126
CAI-1 and AI-2 Vibrio choleraeand associated phages 125
CRISPR-Cas immunity AHL Pseudomonas aeruginosa 128
Serratia sp. 129
QQ degradation of AHL Chromobacterium violaceumand Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
133
Viral hijacking of QS systems 3,5-dimethylpyrazin-2-ol Vibrio choleraeand phage VP882
Regulation of lysis-lysogeny decisions
135
AI-2 Escherichia coliand phage T1
Regulation of lysis-lysogeny decisions
137
AHL Vibrio anguillarumand ϕH20-like phage
Regulation of lysis-lysogeny decisions
136
Phage-produced “arbitrium” signaling peptides Phage of SPbeta group infecting Bacillus subtilis
Regulation of lysis-lysogeny decisions
13
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-07608-9 Review article
Communications Biology|           (2025) 8:179 9

===== PAGE 10 =====
receive and interpret these signals157. This integrated approach to compre-
hending marine QS signaling will provide critical insights into the molecular
interactions that structure marine ecosystems.
Received: 28 June 2024; Accepted: 27 January 2025;
References
1. Azam, F. & Malfatti, F. Microbial structuring of marine ecosystems.
Nat. Rev. Microbiol5, 782–791 (2007).
2. Fuqua, W. C., Winans, S. C. & Greenberg, E. P. Quorum sensing in
bacteria: the LuxR-LuxI family of cell density-responsive
transcriptional regulators.J. Bacteriol.176, 269–275 (1994).
3. Abisado, R. G., Benomar, S., Klaus, J. R., Dandekar, A. A. &
Chandler, J. R. Bacterial Quorum Sensing and Microbial Community
Interactions. mBio 9, e02331–17 (2018).
4. Whiteley, M., Diggle, S. P. & Greenberg, E. P. Progress in and promise
of bacterial quorum sensing research.Nature 551,3 1 3–320 (2017).
5. Nealson, K. H., Platt, T. & Hastings, J. W. Cellular control of the
synthesis and activity of the bacterial luminescent system.J.
Bacteriol. 104, 313–322 (1970).
6. Dow, L. How Do Quorum-Sensing Signals Mediate Algae–Bacteria
Interactions? Microorganisms 9, 1391 (2021).
7. Urvoy, M., Labry, C., L ’Helguen, S. & Lami, R. Quorum Sensing
Regulates Bacterial Processes That Play a Major Role in Marine
Biogeochemical Cycles.Front. Mar. Sci.9, 834337 (2022).
8. Hmelo, L. R. Quorum Sensing in Marine Microbial Environments.
Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci.9, 257–281 (2017).
9. Chen, X. et al. Structural identiﬁcation of a bacterial quorum-sensing
signal containing boron.Nature 415, 545–549 (2002).
10. Lami, R. Quorum Sensing in Marine Bioﬁlms and Environments. in
Quorum Sensing55–96 (Elsevier, 2019).https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-814905-8.00003-4.
11. R o l l a n d ,J .L . ,S t i e n ,D . ,S a n c h e z - F e r a n d i n ,S .&L a m i ,R .Q u o r u mS e n s i n g
and Quorum Quenching in the Phycosphere of Phytoplankton: a Case of
Chemical Interactions in Ecology.J. Chem. Ecol.42, 1201–1211 (2016).
12. Geng, H. & Belas, R. Expression of Tropodithietic Acid Biosynthesis Is
Controlled by a Novel Autoinducer.J. Bacteriol.192,4 3 7 7–4387 (2010).
13. Erez, Z. et al. Communication between viruses guides lysis–lysogeny
decisions. Nature 541,4 8 8–493 (2017).
14. Fan, Q. et al. Structure and Signal Regulation Mechanism of
Interspecies and Interkingdom Quorum Sensing System Receptors.
J. Agric. Food Chem.70
, 429–445 (2022).
15. Lowery, C. A., Dickerson, T. J. & Janda, K. D. Interspecies and
interkingdom communication mediated by bacterial quorum
sensing. Chem. Soc. Rev.37, 1337 (2008).
16. Teplitski, M., Mathesius, U. & Rumbaugh, K. P. Perception and
Degradation ofN -Acyl Homoserine Lactone QuorumSensing Signals
by Mammalian and Plant Cells.Chem. Rev.111,1 0 0–116 (2011).
17. Jin, G. et al. Two G-protein-coupled-receptor candidates, Cand2
and Cand7, are involved inArabidopsis root growth mediated by the
bacterial quorum-sensing signals N-acyl-homoserine lactones.
Biochemical Biophysical Res. Commun.417, 991–995 (2012).
18. Liu, F., Bian, Z., Jia, Z., Zhao, Q. & Song, S. The GCR1 and GPA1
Participate in Promotion ofArabidopsis Primary Root Elongation
Induced byN -Acyl-Homoserine Lactones, the Bacterial Quorum-
Sensing Signals.MPMI 25, 677–683 (2012).
19. González-Pech, R. A. et al. The Evolution, Assembly, and Dynamics
of Marine Holobionts.Annu. Rev. Mar. Sci.16, 443–466 (2024).
20. Egan, S. & Gardiner, M. Microbial Dysbiosis: Rethinking Disease in
Marine Ecosystems.Front. Microbiol. 7, 991 (2016).
21. Certner, R. H. & Vollmer, S. V. Evidence for Autoinduction and
Quorum Sensing in White Band Disease-Causing Microbes on
Acropora cervicornis. Sci. Rep.5, 11134 (2015).
22. Weiland-Bräuer, N., Fischer, M. A., Pinnow, N. & Schmitz, R. A.
Potential role of host-derived quorum quenching in modulating
bacterial colonization in the moon jellyﬁsh Aurelia aurita. Sci. Rep.9,
34 (2019).
23. Longford, S. R. et al. Interactions within the microbiome alter
microbial interactions with host chemical defences and affect
disease in a marine holobiont.Sci. Rep.9, 1363 (2019).
24. Tourneroche, A. et al. Bacterial–Fungal Interactions in the Kelp
Endomicrobiota Drive Autoinducer-2 Quorum Sensing.Front.
Microbiol. 10, 1693 (2019).
25. Pollara, S. B. et al. Bacterial Quorum-Sensing Signal Arrests
Phytoplankton Cell Division and Impacts Virus-Induced Mortality.
mSphere 6, https://doi.org/10.1128/msphere.00009-21 (2021).
26. Stock, F. et al. Distinctive Growth and Transcriptional Changes of the
Diatom Seminavis robustain Response to Quorum Sensing Related
Compounds. Front. Microbiol.11, 1240 (2020).
27. Pietschke, C. et al. Host modiﬁcation of a bacterial quorum-sensing
signal induces a phenotypic switch in bacterial symbionts.Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 114, E8488-E8497 (2017).
28. Borges, A. & Simões, M. Quorum Sensing Inhibition by Marine
Bacteria. Mar. Drugs17, 427 (2019).
29. Xu, M. et al. Interactions between quorum sensing/quorum
quenching and virulence genes may affect coral health by regulating
symbiotic bacterial community.Environ. Res.238, 117221 (2023).
30. Breitbart, M., Bonnain, C., Malki, K. & Sawaya, N. A. Phage puppet
masters of the marine microbial realm.Nat. Microbiol3, 754–766
(2018).
31. Suttle, C. A. Marine viruses–major players in the global ecosystem.
Nat. Rev. Microbiol5, 801–812 (2007).
32. Martínez ‐Pérez, C., Zweifel, S. T., Pioli, R. & Stocker, R. Space, the
ﬁnal frontier: The spatial component of phytoplankton–bacterial
interactions. Mol. Microbiol.122, 331–346 (2024).
33. Decho, A. W. & Gutierrez, T. Microbial Extracellular Polymeric
Substances (EPSs) in Ocean Systems.Front. Microbiol.8, 922
(2017).
34. Hay, M. E. Marine Chemical Ecology: Chemical Signals and Cues
Structure Marine Populations, Communities, and Ecosystems.
Annu. Rev. Mar. Sci.1, 193–212 (2009).
35. Puglisi, M. P., Sneed, J. M., Ritson-Williams, R. & Young, R. Marine
chemical ecology in benthic environments.Nat. Prod. Rep.36,
410–429 (2019).
36. Certner, R. H. & Vollmer, S. V. Inhibiting bacterial quorum sensing
arrests coral disease development and disease‐associated
microbes. Environ. Microbiol.20, 645–657 (2018).
37. Mohamed, A. R., Ochsenkühn, M. A., Kazlak, A. M., Moustafa, A. &
Amin, S. A. The coral microbiome: towards an understanding of the
molecular mechanisms of coral–microbiota interactions.FEMS
Microbiol. Rev.47, fuad005 (2023).
38. Peixoto, R. S. et al. Coral Probiotics: Premise, Promise, Prospects.
Annu. Rev. Anim. Biosci.9, 265–288 (2021).
39. Torres, M. et al. AHL-lactonase expression in three marine emerging
pathogenic Vibrio spp. reduces virulence and mortality in brine
shrimp (Artemia salina) and Manila clam (Venerupis philippinarum).
PLoS ONE13, e0195176 (2018).
40. Zimmer, B. L. et al. Quorum Sensing Signal Production and Microbial
Interactions in a Polymicrobial Disease of Corals and the Coral
Surface Mucopolysaccharide Layer.PLoS ONE9, e108541 (2014).
41. Meyer, J. L., Gunasekera, S. P., Scott, R. M., Paul, V. J. & Teplitski, M.
Microbiome shifts and the inhibition of quorum sensing by Black
Band Disease cyanobacteria.ISME J.10, 1204–1216 (2016).
42. Zhou, J. et al. Opportunistic bacteria use quorum sensing to disturb
coral symbiotic communities and mediate the occurrence of coral
bleaching. Environ. Microbiol.22, 1944–1962 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-07608-9 Review article
Communications Biology|           (2025) 8:179 10

===== PAGE 11 =====
43. Tait, K., Hutchison, Z., Thompson, F. L. & Munn, C. B. Quorum
sensing signal production and inhibition by coral‐associated vibrios.
Environ. Microbiol Rep.2, 145–150 (2010).
44. Sun, X. et al. Identiﬁcation of quorum sensing-regulatedVibrio fortis
as potential pathogenic bacteria for coral bleaching and the effects
on the microbial shift.Front. Microbiol.14, 1116737 (2023).
4 5 . K r e d i e t ,C .J . ,R i t c h i e ,K .B . ,P a u l ,V .J .&T e p l i t s k i ,M .C o r a l - a s s o c i a t e d
micro-organisms and their roles in promoting coral health and thwarting
diseases.P r o c .R .S o c .B .280, 20122328 (2013).
46. Reina, J. C., Pérez, P. & Llamas, I. Quorum Quenching Strains
Isolated from the Microbiota of Sea Anemones and Holothurians
Attenuate Vibrio corallilyticusVirulence Factors and Reduce
Mortality inArtemia salina. Microorganisms 10, 631 (2022).
47. Han, S. et al. AI-2 quorum sensing signal disrupts coral symbiotic
homeostasis and induces host bleaching.Environ. Int.188, 108768
(2024).
48. MacKnight, N. J. et al. Microbial dysbiosis reﬂects disease
resistance in diverse coral species.Commun. Biol.4, 679 (2021).
49. Tout, J. et al. Increased seawater temperature increases the
abundance and alters the structure of naturalVibrio populations
associated with the coralPocillopora damicornis. Front. Microbiol. 6,
432 (2015).
50. Wilkins, L. G. E. et al. Host-associated microbiomes drive structure
and function of marine ecosystems.PLoS Biol.17, e3000533 (2019).
51. Weiland-Bräuer, N. et al. The Native Microbiome is Crucial for
Offspring Generation and Fitness ofAurelia aurita. mBio 11, e02336-
20 (2020).
52. Mane ﬁeld, M. et al. Evidence that halogenated furanones from
Delisea pulchrainhibit acylated homoserine lactone (AHL)-mediated
gene expression by displacing the AHL signal from its receptor
protein. Microbiology 145, 283–291 (1999).
53. Dworjanyn, S. A., De Nys, R. & Steinberg, P. D. Localisation and
surface quantiﬁcation of secondary metabolites in the red alga
Delisea pulchra. Mar. Biol.133, 727–736 (1999).
54. Givskov, M. et al. Eukaryotic interference with homoserine lactone-
mediated prokaryotic signalling.J. Bacteriol.178,6 6 1 8–6622 (1996).
55. Zang, T. et al. A naturally occurring brominated furanone covalently
modiﬁes and inactivates LuxS.Bioorg. Medicinal Chem. Lett.19,
6200–6204 (2009).
56. Fernandes, N. et al. Genomes and Virulence Factors of Novel
Bacterial Pathogens Causing Bleaching Disease in the Marine Red
Alga Delisea pulchra. PLoS ONE6, e27387 (2011).
57. Gardiner, M. et al. VarR controls colonization and virulence in the
marine macroalgal pathogenNautella italicaR11. Front. Microbiol. 6,
1130 (2015).
58. Goecke, F., Labes, A., Wiese, J. & Imhoff, J. Chemical interactions
between marine macroalgae and bacteria.Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser.409,
267–299 (2010).
59. Borchardt, S. A. et al. Reaction of Acylated Homoserine Lactone
Bacterial Signaling Molecules with Oxidized Halogen Antimicrobials.
Appl Environ. Microbiol67, 3174–3179 (2001).
60. Danaraj, J., Mariasingarayan, Y., Ayyappan, S. & Karuppiah, V.
Seagrass Halodule pinifoliaactive constituent 4-methoxybenzioic
acid (4-MBA) inhibits quorum sensing mediated virulence
production ofPseudomonas aeruginosa. Microb. Pathogenesis147,
104392 (2020).
61. Jack, A. A. et al. Alginate Oligosaccharide-Induced Modiﬁcation of
the lasI-lasR and rhlI-rhlR Quorum-Sensing Systems in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.62,
e02318–17 (2018).
62. Kim, J. S., Kim, Y. H., Seo, Y. W. & Park, S. Quorum sensing inhibitors
from the red alga,Ahnfeltiopsisﬂabelliformis. Biotechnol. Bioprocess
Eng. 12,3 0 8–311 (2007).
63. Batista, D., Carvalho, A. P., Costa, R., Coutinho, R. & Dobretsov, S.
Extracts of macroalgae from the Brazilian coast inhibit bacterial
quorum sensing.Botanica Mar.57, 441–447 (2014).
64. Carvalho, A. P., Batista, D., Dobretsov, S. & Coutinho, R. Extracts of
seaweeds as potential inhibitors of quorum sensing and bacterial
growth. J. Appl Phycol.29, 789–797 (2017).
65. Jha, B., Kavita, K., Westphal, J., Hartmann, A. & Schmitt-Kopplin, P.
Quorum Sensing Inhibition byAsparagopsis taxiformis, a Marine
Macro Alga: Separation of the Compound that Interrupts Bacterial
Communication. Mar. Drugs11, 253
–265 (2013).
66. Kulshreshtha, G. et al. Red SeaweedsSarcodiotheca gaudichaudii
and Chondrus crispusdown Regulate Virulence Factors of
Salmonella Enteritidis and Induce Immune Responses in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Front. Microbiol. 7, 421 (2016).
67. Muthukrishnan, S., Muthar, N. I., Zakaria, M. H., Rukayadi, Y. &
Natrah, I. Anti-bioﬁlm and Anti-quorum Sensing Activities of the Red
Seaweed, Gracilaria changiiand its Associated Bacteria.J. Appl
Phycol. 35, 2555–2566 (2023).
68. Skindersoe, M. E. et al. Quorum Sensing Antagonism from Marine
Organisms. Mar. Biotechnol.10,5 6–63 (2008).
69. Karnjana, K. et al. Puriﬁcation and Evaluation of N-benzyl
Cinnamamide from Red SeaweedGracilaria ﬁsheri as an Inhibitor of
Vibrio harveyiAI-2 Quorum Sensing.Mar. Drugs18, 80 (2020).
70. Targett, N. M. & Arnold, T. M. Minireview - Predicting the effects of
the brown algal phlorotannins on marine herbivores in tropical and
temperate oceans.J. Phycol.34, 195–205 (1998).
71. Tang, J., Wang, W. & Chu, W. Antimicrobial and Anti-Quorum
Sensing Activities of Phlorotannins From Seaweed (Hizikia
fusiforme). Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol.10, 586750 (2020).
72. Vallet, M. et al. Novelα-Hydroxy γ-Butenolides of Kelp Endophytes
Disrupt Bacterial Cell-to-Cell Signaling.Front. Mar. Sci.7, 601 (2020).
73. Blanchet, E. et al. Quorum Sensing and Quorum Quenching in the
Mediterranean SeagrassPosidonia oceanicaMicrobiota. Front. Mar.
Sci. 4, 218 (2017).
74. Kanagasabhapathy, M., Yamazaki, G., Ishida, A., Sasaki, H. &
Nagata, S. Presence of quorum-sensing inhibitor-like compounds
from bacteria isolated from the brown algaColpomenia sinuosa.
Lett. Appl. Microbiol.49, 573–579 (2009).
75. Chen, J. et al. Quorum Sensing Inhibitors from Marine Microorganisms
and Their Synthetic Derivatives.Mar. Drugs17, 80 (2019).
76. Ji, H. et al. Citrinin Is a Potential Quorum Sensing Inhibitor against
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Mar. Drugs21, 296 (2023).
77. Yu, X. et al. A Cyclic Dipeptide from Marine FungusPenicillium
chrysogenum
DXY-1 Exhibits Anti-quorum Sensing Activity.ACS
Omega 6, 7693–7700 (2021).
78. Singh, R. P. & Reddy, C. R. K. Seaweed-microbial interactions: key
functions of seaweed-associated bacteria.FEMS Microbiol Ecol.
88, 213–230 (2014).
79. Joint, I. et al. Cell-to-Cell Communication Across the Prokaryote-
Eukaryote Boundary.Science 298, 1207–1207 (2002).
80. Joint, I., Tait, K. & Wheeler, G. Cross-kingdom signalling:
exploitation of bacterial quorum sensing molecules by the green
seaweed Ulva. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B362, 1223–1233 (2007).
81. Twigg, M. S., Tait, K., Williams, P., Atkinson, S. & Cámara, M.
Interference with the germination and growth ofU lvazoospores by
quorum‐sensing molecules fromUlva ‐associated epiphytic
bacteria. Environ. Microbiol.16, 445–453 (2014).
82. Weinberger, F. et al. Spore release inAcrochaetiumsp. (Rhodophyta)
is bacterially controlled.J. Phycol.43,2 3 5–241 (2007).
83. Kuhlisch, C., Shemi, A., Barak-Gavish, N., Schatz, D. & Vardi, A. Algal
blooms in the ocean: hot spots for chemically mediated microbial
interactions. Nat Rev Microbiolhttps://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-
023-00975-2 (2023).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-07608-9 Review article
Communications Biology|           (2025) 8:179 11

===== PAGE 12 =====
84. Seymour, J. R., Amin, S. A., Raina, J. B. & Stocker, R. Zooming in on
the phycosphere: the ecological interface for phytoplankton-
bacteria relationships.Nat. Microbiol2, 17065 (2017).
85. Cole, J. J. Interactions between Bacteria and Algae in Aquatic
Ecosystems. Annu Rev. Ecol. Syst.13, 291–314 (1982).
86. Yoch, D. C. Dimethylsulfoniopropionate: Its Sources, Role in the
Marine Food Web, and Biological Degradation to Dimethylsulﬁde.
Appl Environ. Microbiol68, 5804–5815 (2002).
87. Falkowski, P. G. The role of phytoplankton photosynthesis in global
biogeochemical cycles.Photosynth Res39, 235–258 (1994).
88. Fuhrman, J. A. & Azam, F. Thymidine incorporation as a measure of
heterotrophic bacterioplankton production in marine surface waters:
Evaluation andﬁeld results.Mar. Biol.66, 109–120 (1982).
89. Amin, S. A. et al. Interaction and signalling between a cosmopolitan
phytoplankton and associated bacteria.Nature 522,9 8–101 (2015).
90. Seyedsayamdost, M. R., Case, R. J., Kolter, R. & Clardy, J. The
Jekyll-and-Hyde chemistry ofPhaeobacter gallaeciensis. Nat.
Chem. 3, 331–335 (2011).
91. Huang, X., Cai, Z., Lin, G. & Zhou, J. Quorum sensing modulating
algae–bacteria interactions.Chin. J. Appl. Environ. Biol.22,
0708–0717 (2016).
92. Huang, X. et al. Proﬁles of quorum sensing (QS)-related sequences
in phycospheric microorganisms during a marine dinoﬂagellate
bloom, as determined by a metagenomic approach.Microbiological
Res. 217,1 –13 (2018).
9 3 . Z h o u ,J . ,L y u ,Y . ,R i c h l e n ,M .L . ,A n d e r s o n ,D .M .&C a i ,Z .Q u o r u m
Sensing Is a Language of Chemical Signals and Plays an Ecological Role
in Algal-Bacterial Interactions.C r i t .R e v .P l a n tS c i .35,8 1–105 (2016).
94. Platt, A. J. & Whalen, K. E. Probing the Phycosphere: Techniques to
Study Bacteria-Phytoplankton Interactions.Integr. Comp. Biol.63,
1509–1519 (2023).
95. Waters, C. M. & Bassler, B. L. Quorum sensing: Cell-to-Cell
Communication in Bacteria.Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.21, 319–346
(2005).
96. Fei, C. et al. Quorum sensing regulates‘swim‐or‐stick’ lifestyle in the
phycosphere. Environ. Microbiol.22, 4761–4778 (2020).
97. Natrah, F. M. I. et al. Effects of micro-algae commonly used in
aquaculture on acyl-homoserine lactone quorum sensing.
Aquaculture 317,5 3–57 (2011).
98. Williams, P. Quorum sensing, communication and cross-kingdom
signalling in the bacterial world.Microbiology153, 3923–3938 (2007).
99. Landa, M., Burns, A. S., Roth, S. J. & Moran, M. A. Bacterial
transcriptome remodeling during sequential co-culture with a
marine dinoﬂagellate and diatom.ISME J.11, 2677–2690 (2017).
100. Shibl, A. A. et al. Diatom modulation of select bacteria through use of
two unique secondary metabolites.Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA117,
27445–27455 (2020).
101. Corral-Lugo, A., Daddaoua, A., Ortega, A., Espinosa-Urgel, M. &
Krell, T. Rosmarinic acid is a homoserine lactone mimic produced by
plants that activates a bacterial quorum-sensing regulator.Sci.
Signal. 9, 409 (2016).
102. Zhu, J. et al. Dynamic patterns of quorum sensing signals in
phycospheric microbes during a marine algal bloom.Environ. Res.
212, 113443 (2022).
103. Romero, M., Muro-Pastor, A. M. & Otero, A. Quorum sensing
N-acylhomoserine lactone signals affect nitrogenﬁxation in the
cyanobacteriumAnabaena sp. PCC7120: AHLs inhibit nitrogen
ﬁxation in cyanobacteria.FEMS Microbiol. Lett.315,1 0 1–108 (2011).
104. Van Mooy, B. A. et al. Quorum sensing control of phosphorus
acquisition inTrichodesmium consortia. ISME J.6, 422–429 (2012).
105. Johnson, W. M., Kido Soule, M. C. & Kujawinski, E. B. Evidence for
quorum sensing and differential metabolite production by a marine
bacterium in response to DMSP.ISME J.10, 2304–2316 (2016).
106. Nakashima, T. et al. Producing mechanism of an algicidal compound
against red tide phytoplankton in a marine bacteriumγ-
proteobacterium. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol.73, 684–690 (2006).
107. Paul, C. & Pohnert, G. Interactions of the Algicidal BacteriumKordia
algicida with Diatoms: Regulated Protease Excretion for Speciﬁc
Algal Lysis.PLoS ONE6, e21032 (2011).
108. Zhang, S.-J. et al. The complete genome sequence of the algicidal
bacterium Bacillus subtilisstrain JA and the use of quorum sensing
to evaluate its antialgal ability.Biotechnol. Rep.25, e00421 (2020).
109. Chi, W. et al. Quorum sensing of microalgae associated marine
Ponticoccus sp. PD-2 and its algicidal function regulation.AMB
Expr. 7, 59 (2017).
110. Schaefer, A. L. et al. A new class of homoserine lactone quorum-
sensing signals.Nature 454, 595–599 (2008).
111. Geng, H., Bruhn, J. B., Nielsen, K. F., Gram, L. & Belas, R. Genetic
Dissection of Tropodithietic Acid Biosynthesis by Marine
Roseobacters. Appl Environ. Microbiol74, 1535–1545 (2008).
112. Greer, E. M., Aebisher, D., Greer, A. & Bentley, R. Computational
Studies of the Tropone Natural Products, Thiotropocin,
Tropodithietic Acid, and Troposulfenin. Signiﬁcance of Thiocarbonyl
−Enol Tautomerism.J. Org. Chem.73, 280–283 (2008).
113. Thiel, V. et al. Identiﬁcation and biosynthesis of tropone derivatives
and sulfur volatiles produced by bacteria of the marine Roseobacter
clade. Org. Biomol. Chem.8, 234–246 (2010).
114. González, J. M., Kiene, R. P. & Moran, M. A. Transformation of Sulfur
Compounds by an Abundant Lineage of Marine Bacteria in theα-
Subclass of the ClassProteobacteria. Appl Environ. Microbiol65,
3810–3819 (1999).
115. Newton, R. J. et al. Genome characteristics of a generalist marine
bacterial lineage.ISME J.4, 784–798 (2010).
116. Garrett, O. & Whalen, K. E. A bacterial quorum sensing signal is a
potent inhibitor of de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis in the globally
abundant Emiliania huxleyi. Front. Microbiol.14, 1266972 (2023).
117. Teplitski, M. et al.Chlamydomonas reinhardtiiSecretes Compounds
That Mimic Bacterial Signals and Interfere with Quorum Sensing
Regulation in Bacteria.Plant Physiol.134, 137–146 (2004).
118. Brisson, V. et al. Identiﬁcation of Effector Metabolites Using
Exometabolite Proﬁling of Diverse Microalgae.mSystems
6,
e00835-21 (2021).
119. Mausz, M. A. & Pohnert, G. Phenotypic diversity of diploid and
haploid Emiliania huxleyicells and of cells in different growth phases
revealed by comparative metabolomics.J. Plant Physiol.172,
137–148 (2015).
120. Rajamani, S. et al. The Vitamin Riboﬂavin and Its Derivative Lumichrome
Activate the LasR Bacterial Quorum-Sensing Receptor.MPMI 21,
1184–1192 (2008).
121. Dahan, Y., Wingreen, N. S. & Meir, Y. The value of information gathering
in phage–bacteria warfare.PNAS Nexus3, pgad431 (2023).
122. Duddy, O. P. & Bassler, B. L. Quorum sensing across bacterial and
viral domains.PLoS Pathog.17, e1009074 (2021).
123. Golais, F., Hollý, J. & Vítkovská, J. Coevolution of bacteria and their
viruses. Folia Microbiol58, 177–186 (2013).
124. Høyland-Kroghsbo, N. M., Mærkedahl, R. B. & Svenningsen, S. L. A
Quorum-Sensing-Induced Bacteriophage Defense Mechanism.
mBio 4, e00362–12 (2013).
125. Hoque, M. M. et al. Quorum Regulated Resistance ofVibrio cholerae
against Environmental Bacteriophages.Sci. Rep.6, 37956 (2016).
126. Tan, D., Svenningsen, S. L. & Middelboe, M. Quorum Sensing
Determines the Choice of Antiphage Defense Strategy inVibrio
anguillarum. mBio 6, e00627–15 (2015).
127. Letarov, A. & Kulikov, E. The bacteriophages in human- and animal
body-associated microbial communities.J. Appl. Microbiol.107,
1–13 (2009).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-07608-9 Review article
Communications Biology|           (2025) 8:179 12

===== PAGE 13 =====
128. Høyland-Kroghsbo, N. M. et al. Quorum sensing controls the
Pseudomonas aeruginosaCRISPR-Cas adaptive immune system.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. Usa.114, 131–135 (2017).
129. Patterson, A. G. et al. Quorum Sensing Controls Adaptive Immunity
through the Regulation of Multiple CRISPR-Cas Systems.Mol. Cell
64, 1102–1108 (2016).
130. Van Houte, S. et al. The diversity-generating beneﬁts of a prokaryotic
adaptive immune system.Nature 532, 385–388 (2016).
131. Stern, A., Keren, L., Wurtzel, O., Amitai, G. & Sorek, R. Self-targeting
by CRISPR: gene regulation or autoimmunity?Trends Genet.26,
335–340 (2010).
132. Vercoe, R. B. et al. Cytotoxic Chromosomal Targeting by CRISPR/
Cas Systems Can Reshape Bacterial Genomes and Expel or
Remodel Pathogenicity Islands.PLoS Genet9, e1003454 (2013).
133. Mion, S., Plener, L., Rémy, B., Daudé, D. & Chabrière, É. Lactonase
SsoPox modulates CRISPR-Cas expression in gram-negative
proteobacteria using AHL-based quorum sensing systems.Res.
Microbiol. 170, 296–299 (2019).
134. Hargreaves, K. R., Kropinski, A. M. & Clokie, M. R. J. What Does the
Talking?: Quorum Sensing Signalling Genes Discovered in a
Bacteriophage Genome.PLoS ONE9, e85131 (2014).
135. Silpe, J. E. & Bassler, B. L. A Host-Produced Quorum-Sensing
Autoinducer Controls a Phage Lysis-Lysogeny Decision.Cell 176,
268–280.e13 (2019).
136. Tan, D. et al. High cell densities favor lysogeny: induction of an H20
prophage is repressed by quorum sensing and enhances bioﬁlm
formation inVibrio anguillarum. ISME J.14, 1731–1742 (2020).
137. Laganenka, L. et al. Quorum Sensing and Metabolic State of the
Host Control Lysogeny-Lysis Switch of Bacteriophage T1.mBio 10,
e01884-19 (2019).
138. Liang, X., Wagner, R. E., Li, B., Zhang, N. & Radosevich, M. Quorum
Sensing Signals Alter in vitro Soil Virus Abundance and Bacterial
Community Composition.Front. Microbiol.11, 1287 (2020).
139. Knowles, B. et al. Lytic to temperate switching of viral communities.
Nature 531, 466–470 (2016).
140. Doekes, H. M., Mulder, G. A. & Hermsen, R. Repeated outbreaks
drive the evolution of bacteriophage communication.eLife 10,
e58410 (2021).
141. Bernard, C., Li, Y., Lopez, P. & Bapteste, E. Beyond arbitrium:
identiﬁcation of a second communication system inBacillus phage
phi3T that may regulate host defense mechanisms.
ISME J.15,
545–549 (2021).
142. Harvey, E. et al. Quorum sensing signal disrupts viral infection
dynamics in the coccolithophoreEmiliania huxleyi. Aquat. Microb.
Ecol. 89,7 5–86 (2023).
143. Mashburn, L. M. & Whiteley, M. Membrane vesicles trafﬁc signals
and facilitate group activities in a prokaryote.Nature 437, 422–425
(2005).
144. Schwechheimer, C. & Kuehn, M. J. Outer-membrane vesicles from
Gram-negative bacteria: biogenesis and functions.Nat. Rev.
Microbiol 13, 605–619 (2015).
145. Biller, S. J. et al. Bacterial Vesicles in Marine Ecosystems.Science
343, 183–186 (2014).
146. Brameyer, S. et al. Outer Membrane Vesicles Facilitate Trafﬁcking of
the Hydrophobic Signaling Molecule CAI-1 betweenVibrio harveyi
Cells. J Bacteriol200, https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.00740-17 (2018).
147. Li, J., Azam, F. & Zhang, S. Outer membrane vesicles containing
signalling molecules and active hydrolytic enzymes released by a coral
pathogenVibrio shiloniiAK1.Environ. Microbiol.18, 3850–3866 (2016).
148. Batista, J. H. et al. Interplay between two quorum sensing‐regulated
pathways, violacein biosynthesis and
VACJ /Yrb, dictates outer
membrane vesicle biogenesis inChromobacterium violaceum.
Environ. Microbiol.22, 2432–2442 (2020).
149. Choi, S. Y. et al.Chromobacterium violaceumdelivers violacein, a
hydrophobic antibiotic, to other microbes in membrane vesicles.
Environ. Microbiol.22, 705–713 (2020).
150. Schatz, D. & Vardi, A. Extracellular vesicles— new players in cell–cell
communication in aquatic environments.Curr. Opin. Microbiol.43,
148–154 (2018).
151. Aschtgen, M.-S., Wetzel, K., Goldman, W., McFall-Ngai, M. & Ruby,
E. Vibrio ﬁscheri -derived outer membrane vesicles trigger host
development: OMV deliver signals in the squid/vibrio symbiosis.
Cell. Microbiol.18, 488–499 (2016).
152. Schatz, D. et al. Ecological signiﬁcance of extracellular vesicles in
modulating host-virus interactions during algal blooms.ISME J.15,
3714–3721 (2021).
153. Tzipilevich, E., Habusha, M. & Ben-Yehuda, S. Acquisition of Phage
Sensitivity by Bacteria through Exchange of Phage Receptors.Cell
168, 186–199.e12 (2017).
154. Schatz, D. et al. Communication via extracellular vesicles enhances viral
infection of a cosmopolitan alga.Nat. Microbiol2, 1485–1492 (2017).
155. Verma, S. & Miyashiro, T. Quorum Sensing in the Squid-Vibrio
Symbiosis. IJMS 14, 16386–16401 (2013).
156. Cui, Y. et al. SlipO
2 Chip – single-cell respiration under tuneable
environments. Lab Chip24, 4786–4797 (2024).
157. O ’Toole, G. A. We have a community problem.J Bacteriole00073-24
https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.00073-24 (2024).
158. Tait, K. et al. Disruption of quorum sensing in seawater abolishes
attraction of zoospores of the green algaUlva to bacterial bioﬁlms.
Environ. Microbiol.7, 229–240 (2005).
159. Wheeler, G. L., Tait, K., Taylor, A., Brownlee, C. & Joint, I. Acyl‐
homoserine lactones modulate the settlement rate of zoospores of
the marine algaUlva intestinalisvia a novel chemokinetic
mechanism. Plant Cell Environ.29, 608–618 (2006).
160. Huang, Y.-L., Dobretsov, S., Ki, J.-S., Yang, L.-H. & Qian, P.-Y.
Presence of Acyl-Homoserine Lactone in Subtidal Bioﬁlm and the
Implication in Larval Behavioral Response in the Polychaete
Hydroides elegans. Micro. Ecol.54, 384–392 (2007).
161. Tait, K. & Havenhand, J. Investigating a possible role for the bacterial
signal molecules N‐acylhomoserine lactones inBalanus improvisus
cyprid settlement.Mol. Ecol.22, 2588–2602 (2013).
162. Romero, M., Diggle, S. P., Heeb, S., CÃ¡mara, M. & Otero, A.
Quorum quenching activity inAnabaena sp. PCC 7120: identiﬁcation
of AiiC, a novel AHL-acylase.FEMS Microbiol. Lett.280,7 3–80
(2008).
163. Syrpas, M. et al. Haloperoxidase Mediated Quorum Quenching by
Nitzschia cf pellucida: Study of the Metabolization of N-Acyl Homoserine
Lactones by a Benthic Diatom.Mar. Drugs12,3 5 2–367 (2014).
164. Stock, F. et al.N -Acyl Homoserine Lactone Derived Tetramic Acids
Impair Photosynthesis inPhaeodactylum tricornutum. ACS Chem.
Biol. 14, 198–203 (2019).
165. Dow, L. et al. The Multifaceted Inhibitory Effects of an Alkylquinolone
on the DiatomPhaeodactylum tricornutum. ChemBioChem 21,
1206–1216 (2020).
166. Wang, R., Gallant, É. & Seyedsayamdost, M. R. Investigation of
the Genetics and Biochemistry of Roseobacticide Production in
the Roseobacter Clade Bacterium Phaeobacter inhibens.mBio 7,
e02118–15 (2016).
Acknowledgements
Preparation of this manuscript was funded by NSF IOS 2041748 and by
the Charles E. Kaufman Foundation Integrated Research Education Grant
(KA2021-121932) to K.E.W. In addition, M.C. was supported by the
Arnold and Mable Beckman Fellowship. We would like to acknowledge
Elizabeth Harvey and Jiahe Wu for their helpful comments on drafts of
the manuscript.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-07608-9 Review article
Communications Biology|           (2025) 8:179 13

===== PAGE 14 =====
Author contributions
M.C. developed the outline andﬁrst draft of the manuscript. K.E.W. edited the
ﬁrst draft. Both authors edited the revised manuscript, which K.E.W.ﬁnalized.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Kristen E. Whalen.
Peer review informationCommunications Biologythanks Jin Zhou, Irene
Wagner-Döbler and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to
the peer review of this work. Primary Handling Editors: Linn Hoffmann and
David Favero.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open AccessThis article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed material. You
do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material
derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To
view a copy of this licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/
.
© The Author(s) 2025
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-07608-9 Review article
Communications Biology|           (2025) 8:179 14