

===== PAGE 1 =====
Essay
The Ecology of Collective Behavior
Deborah M. Gordon*
Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States of America
Abstract: Similar patterns of inter-
action, such as network motifs and
feedback loops, are used in many
natural collective processes, proba-
bly because they have evolved
independently under similar pres-
sures. Here I consider how three
environmental constraints may
shape the evolution of collective
behavior: the patchiness of resourc-
es, the operating costs of maintain-
ing the interaction network that
produces collective behavior, and
the threat of rupture of the net-
work. The ants are a large and
successful taxon that have evolved
in very diverse environments. Ex-
amples from ants provide a starting
point for examining more generally
the fit between the particular
pattern of interaction that regu-
lates activity, and the environment
in which it functions.
Collective behavior operates without
central control to regulate activity and
growth. Systems that operate in this way
are ubiquitous in nature. Cells act collec-
tively, for example, as networks of neurons
to produce sensations, or as patrolling T-
cells that mobilize other immune cells to
respond to pathogens. Many animal
groups regulate their movement without
a leader, such as bird flocks that turn in
the sky, or fish schools that swerve to avoid
predators. Social insects live in colonies,
and simple cues, mostly chemical, regulate
how colonies forage, maintain their nests,
and reproduce.
Over the past 20 years, across all the
fields of biology, attention has turned to
deciphering how local interactions pro-
duce collective global outcomes (e.g., [1]).
We see recurring patterns: a small number
of network motifs predominate in gene
transcription [2]; similar neural circuits
are used in different sensory systems [3];
and feedback loops regulate collective
behavior in many interacting groups, such
as bacteria, fish, dolphins, and social
insects [4–8].
It is likely that similar interaction
patterns are used in many natural collec-
tive processes because they have evolved
independently under similar pressures [9].
Such pressures are ecological, a conse-
quence of how the collective behavior acts
within, and acts upon, a dynamic envi-
ronment. But an ecological perspective is
missing so far from the study of collective
regulation, in molecules, cells, and even in
animal groups.
In systems biology and neuroscience,
many motifs and circuits have been
identified, each a process that uses local
interactions to regulate activities such as
gene transcription, metabolism, or percep-
tion. Showing that patterns exist, for
example that the distribution of motifs
differs from a random one [10] is a first
step; the next will be to show how the
patterns have evolved to function in
relation to a particular environment. A
quantitative description of why a process is
effective, or a simulation that selects for
that process [2,11–14], helps us to under-
stand how it works. But to understand its
evolution we need to know its ecological
consequences, what problems it solves in a
particular environment, and how it is
shaped by, and influences, changing
conditions [15].
Outlining hypotheses about the fit
between collective behavior and its envi-
ronment can guide the investigation of
collective behavior. For example, we now
know enough about physiology that we
expect animals that live in hot places to
have adaptations for heat exchange. In the
same way, we can expect the algorithm
that dictates collective organization in
particular conditions to be tuned to the
constraints of those conditions. With
respect to the workings of collective
biological systems, we are like the Euro-
pean naturalists of the early 19th century,
agog in the Amazon. We are searching for
general trends amidst enormous diversity
and complexity. A framework for the
match between process and environmental
conditions can provide predictions that
guide the investigation of new systems.
Here I consider three environmental
constraints that probably shape the evolu-
tion of collective behavior: the patchiness
of resources, the operating costs of main-
taining the interaction network that pro-
duces collective behavior, and the threat of
rupture of the network. Other important
constraints are not considered here to keep
this essay brief.
Ants offer many examples of the match
between particular environmental con-
straints and the regulatory processes used
in those conditions. The ants are a hugely
successful taxon of more than 12,000
species, found in every terrestrial habitat
and using every resource. All ant species
live in colonies that operate without any
central control, using patterns of interac-
tion to regulate activity [6]. We can see
how ant colonies regulate their behavior in
response to their environments, and this
provides a starting point for examining
more generally the fit between a pattern of
interaction and the environment in which
it functions.
Patchiness in Space and Time
A basic function of collective algo-
rithms is to regulate how the system
Essays articulate a specific perspective on a topic of
broad interest to scientists.
Citation: Gordon DM (2014) The Ecology of Collective Behavior. PLoS Biol 12(3): e1001805. doi:10.1371/
journal.pbio.1001805
Published March 11, 2014
Copyright: /C2232014 Deborah M. Gordon. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
Funding: The author received no specific funding for this work.
Competing Interests:The author has declared that no competing interests exist.
* E-mail: dmgordon@stanford.edu
PLOS Biology | www.plosbiology.org 1 March 2014 | Volume 12 | Issue 3 | e1001805

===== PAGE 2 =====
explores and exploits its environment,
searching for and using some resource.
How best to search and retrieve depends
on the heterogeneity, in space and time,
of the resource [16,17]. Heterogeneity
can be characterized by the degree of
patchiness (Figure 1). A resource occurs in
patches when its presence means there is
likely to be more nearby, in space or time.
It is not patchy when its occurrence is a
Poisson process, so that it pops up in
space or time unpredictably.
When resources are uniform in space,
the components of a system can engage
independently in search and retrieval,
without using recruitment. For example,
harvester ants in the desert forage for
scattered seeds. The seeds are distributed
by wind and flooding, and are not patchy
in space [18]. An ant can retrieve a seed
on its own, and the presence of one seed
does not mean that there are likely to be
more seeds for others to find. These ants
search individually and do not lay phero-
mone trails to recruit others to seeds.
When resources are patchy in space but
not in time, rapid recruitment is useful. In
ants this leads to trail formation [19,20],
familiar in many of the ant species that show
up in our kitchens. A scouting ant that finds
food lays a trail as it returns to the nest, which
stimulates other foragers to return to the food,
and then lay more chemical trail when they
carry the food back to the nest.
Some cellular systems also utilize re-
sources that are patchy in space. In the
immune system, T-cells hunt through
networks of capillaries for pathogens that
are patchy in space, tending to persist in a
particular location, and reaching patho-
gens quickly is helpful because that limits
the time available to the pathogens to
reproduce and spread. Recruitment by T-
cells uses inflammatory signals that acti-
vate cells in nearby lymph nodes to
respond to the pathogen [21]. Similarly,
metastatic cancer cells may use signals
from healthy tissue to recruit other cancer
cells to a new location [22], if certain areas
of tissue constitute an attractive resource,
persistent in time and space, for the
traveling cells.
When patchy resources persist in both
time and space, the system that regulates
retrieval can afford the luxury of inflexi-
bility. The red wood ant feeds on the
sugary excretions of aphids that suck the
sap from trees. A colony forms permanent
trails from the nest to the tree, and
individual ants travel back and forth on
the same trail all their lives. Once an ant
becomes associated with a certain foraging
direction, it cannot be induced to change
trails even for a higher quality resource
[23].
Inside cells, bistable signal transduc-
tion circuits operate in conditions that
are patchy in time, and produce an
irreversible transition when an unfavor-
able condition changes to a favorable
one. For example, in frog oogenesis, the
MAPK cascade is a bistable signaling
system that is triggered by conditions
favorable to mating, inducing the pro-
duction of progesterone that sends oo-
cytes into cell division and on the path to
further development [24]. These signal-
ing patterns lead to inflexibility in
response to consistent, patchy conditions
or resources.
Operating Costs
Operating costs create a second set of
environmental constraints that influence
regulatory processes (Figure 2) [12].
When operating costs are low, the
system can keep running unless some-
thing stops it, using negative feedback,
or repressors: interactions that tend to
inhibit or dampen activity. For example,
in the humid environment of the tropics,
searching costs for ants are low. With so
many ants searching every surface,
and very high species diversity, ants
of different colonies often meet at
resources. The probability that an ant
stays at a food resource decreases in
response to its encounters with ants that
do not have the odor of nestmates. Thus
ants continue probing every resource
unless they are repelled by another
colony, and whichever colony has more
ants at the resource first is likely to keep
it [25].
In gene transcription networks, inco-
herent loops provide negative feedback
that decrease production by repressing
transcription once threshold amounts are
reached. The system thus bears the cost of
producing two products, one of which
acts to inhibit the other. As with the
tropical ants, low operating costs may
make such network motifs more common,
here for proteins that are cheaper to
produce.
When operating costs are high, so that
significant amounts of resources are used
merely to keep the interaction network
going, regulation works in the opposite
direction, to keep activity down except
when it is worthwhile. Activity is low
unless stimulated by interactions that are
likely to occur only when activity is
warranted.
For example, harvester ants in the
desert lose water by foraging, and get
water by metabolizing the fats out of the
seeds that foragers collect. Thus the colony
must spend water to get water, so
operating costs are high. Colonies regulate
foraging activity using an autocatalytic
process [26]. Outgoing foragers leave the
Figure 2. Effect of operating costs.(A)
Process that stops unless initiated by a
positive event. (B) Process that continues
unless stopped by a negative event.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001805.g002
Figure 1. Patchiness in space and time.
(A) Uniform. (B) Patchy.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001805.g001
PLOS Biology | www.plosbiology.org 2 March 2014 | Volume 12 | Issue 3 | e1001805

===== PAGE 3 =====
nest in response to interaction with
returning foragers with food. Each forager
searches until it finds food, so the more
food is available, the more quickly foragers
find it and the more they stimulate others
to leave the nest. When food is scarce
there is little foraging and little water loss.
Likewise TCP, the protocol that manages
traffic congestion in the internet, uses a
similar algorithm in which a signal that a
data packet has successfully passed a
checkpoint stimulates the transmission of
further data [27].
Natural selection is currently shaping
the collective behavior of harvester ant
colonies in response to the high operat-
ing cost of foraging in the desert [28].
Variation among colonies in the regu-
lation of foraging activity is associated
with reproductive success. Colonies that
restrict foraging more in dry conditions,
conserving water by using more strin-
gent autocatalysis to stimulate foraging,
are the ones likely to have offspring
colonies.
In gene transcription networks, activa-
tors and repressors act to provide positive
and negative feedback [29]. For example,
fast-forward loops (FFLs) are based on
positive feedback: signal X stimulates Y,
which stimulates Z, and Z is not produced
unless both X and Y are present. The
extra step, in which X stimulates Y, can be
regulated when Z is not needed and
prevent the production of Z [30,31]. FFL
motifs, based on positive feedback, may be
most common in situations when the
operating cost of producing Z is especially
high.
Threat of Rupture
The threat of rupture is low when
patterns of interaction are protected
from interruption. In such environ-
ments, permanent connections and spe-
cialization can be used. Argentine ants
forage on robust, long-lasting trails that
connect many nests. Recruitment to
new resources is conducted from the
permanent trails, not from the nests
[32]. Thus the function of the trails,
which are rarely ruptured, is specialized
in a way similar to our highways and
roads; some trails are dedicated to
maintaining the flow of ongoing
traffic, while others are used for
shorter distances and more ephemeral
opportunities.
Tissue differentiation in development
relies on a low threat of rupture. Cells
differentiate in response to interactions
with surrounding cells that depend on a
slow gradient of signaling pathways across
space. For example, in most vertebrate
animals brains sit inside hard cases;
traumatic injury is rare (and brains are
not well adapted to recover from it).
Neural functions rely on well-established
sets of connections that grow over a long
time [33]. In a mammalian brain, exper-
imentally linking retinal projections to the
auditory cortex leads auditory neurons to
develop the features of and act as visual
ones [34], because specialization is pro-
duced by the local spatial context, sus-
tained over time. In gene transcription
networks, long cascades can be used when
the threat of rupture is low enough that
there is sufficient time for the many
interactions needed to adjust transcription
[2].
When the threat of rupture is high,
distributed systems and redundancy
can be helpful. Distributed systems, in
which a given component serves differ-
ent functions depending on circum-
stances, are used to create robust large
systems in computer engineering. In
most ant species studied so far it
seems that the allocation of tasks, or
functions, to ants, uses a distributed
system; changes in conditions shift the
rate of local interaction that regulates
ant activity [6]. For example, in har-
vester ants, patrollers change task to
become foragers when more food be-
c o m e sa v a i l a b l e .I na n t sd i s t r i b u t e d
systems of task allocation may be a
widespread response to rupture due to
the frequent loss of ants. The network is
more robust if one ant can easily replace
another.
Redundancy is helpful when the threat
of rupture is high because it helps the
system to recover quickly. Colonies of the
tropical arboreal turtle ant form trails
between food resources and a series of
nests in the trees [35]. They nest in rotten
branches that frequently break and fall
down. The ants quickly re-establish the
connection between the remaining nests
and food sources. A ring network, with
signals or ants flowing in both directions,
allows for rapid recovery, because after a
break in the flow in one direction, the
flow in the other direction can re-establish
a link (Figure 3). Ring networks are used
for similar reasons in fiber optic cable
networks, so that one break does not
bring down the entire system. In gene
transcription networks, dense overlapping
regions may tend to occur in regions
where rupture or recombination is more
likely.
Conclusion
Ecological constraints—such as hetero-
geneity in time and space, operating costs,
and the threat of rupture—may shape the
processes used to regulate activity in many
biological systems. Both theoretical and
empirical work are needed to investigate
this fit, and to move toward a general
understanding of the evolution of collec-
tive behavior. An ecological perspective
can bring together current work in the
investigation of diverse complex systems.
What an ant does generates, and depends
on, the way its colony deals with the world.
This is true of many other biological
systems; to understand the action of any
part, we need to look at what is going on
around it.
Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Eric von Hippel for inspiration
and perspective. I am grateful to Jim Ferrell and
Hana El-Samad for their help in introducing me
to systems biology, and to LeAnn Howard,
William Flesch, and John Doyle for comments
on the manuscript.
Figure 3. Ring network.(A) Ring network
with flow in both directions. (B) When flow in
one direction is interrupted, flow in the other
direction facilitates recovery.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001805.g003
PLOS Biology | www.plosbiology.org 3 March 2014 | Volume 12 | Issue 3 | e1001805

===== PAGE 4 =====
References
1. Sumpter DJT (2010) Collective animal behavior.
Princeton (New Jersey); Oxford: Princeton Uni-
versity Press. 302 p.
2. Alon U (2007) An introduction to systems biology:
design principles of biological circuits. Boca
Raton (Florida): Chapman & Hall/CRC. 301 p.
3. Anderson ML (2007) Evolution of cognitive
function via redeployment of brain areas. Neuro-
scientist 13: 13–21.
4. Couzin ID, Krause J, Franks NR, Levin SA (2005)
Effective leadership and decision-making in animal
groups on the move. Nature 433: 513–516.
5. Miller MB, Bassler BL (2001) Quorum sensing in
bacteria. Annu Rev Microbiol 55: 165–199.
6. Gordon DM (2010) Ant encounters: interaction
networks and colony behavior. Princeton (New
Jersey): Princeton University Press. 167 p.
7. Ben Jacob E, Becker I, Shapira Y, Levine H (2004)
Bacterial linguistic communication and social
intelligence. Trends Microbiol 12: 366–372.
8. Lusseau D (2003) The emergent properties of a
dolphin social network. Proc Biol Sci 270 Suppl 2:
S186–188.
9. Doyle JC, Csete M (2011) Architecture, con-
straints, and behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
108 Suppl 3: 15624–15630.
10. Sandefur CI, Mincheva M, Schnell S (2013)
Network representations and methods for the
analysis of chemical and biochemical pathways.
Mol Biosyst 9: 2189–2200.
11. Kaluza P, Vingron M, Mikhailov AS (2008) Self-
correcting networks: function, robustness, and
motif distributions in biological signal processing.
Chaos 18: 026113.
12. Chandra F, Gayme DF, Chen LJ, Doyle JC
(2011) Robustness, optimization, and architec-
tures. Eur J Control 17: 472–482.
13. Iglesias PA, Ingalls BP (2010) Control theory and
systems biology. Cambridge (Massachusetts);
London: MIT Press. 345 p.
14. Schweitzer F (2003) Brownian agents and active
particles: collective dynamics in the natural and
social sciences. Berlin; London: Springer. 420 p.
15. Levins R (1968) Evolution in changing environ-
ments: Some theoretical explorations. Princeton
(New Jersey): Princeton University Press. 120 p.
16. Levin SA (1992) The problem of pattern and scale
in ecology. Ecology 73: 1943–1967.
17. Pielou EC (1977) Mathematical ecology. New
York; Chichester: Wiley. 385 p.
18. Gordon DM (1993) The spatial scale of seed
collection by harvester ants. Oecologia 95: 479–487.
19. Flanagan TP, Letendre K, Burnside W, Fricke
GM, Moses M (2011) How ants turn information
into food. Artificial Life (ALIFE), 2011 IEEE
Symposium on Artificial Life: 178–185.
20. Letendre K, Moses ME (2013) Synergy in ant
foraging strategies: memory and communication
alone and in combination. Gecco’13: Proceedings
of the 2013 Genetic and Evolutionary Computa-
tion Conference: 41–48.
21. Banerjee S, Levin D, Moses M, Koster F, Forrest
S (2011) The value of inflammatory signals in
adaptive immune responses. Artificial Immune
Systems: 1–14.
22. Gupta GP, Massague J (2006) Cancer metastasis:
building a framework. Cell 127: 679–695.
23. Gordon DM, Rosengren R, Sundstrom L (1992)
The allocation of foragers in red wood ants. Ecol
Entomol 17: 114–120.
24. Ferrell JE, Jr. (2002) Self-perpetuating states in
signal transduction: positive feedback, double-
negative feedback and bistability. Curr Opin Cell
Biol 14: 140–148.
25. Adams ES (1994) Territory defense by the ant
Azteca trigona : maintenance of an arboreal ant
mosaic. Oecologia 97: 202–208.
26. Gordon DM, Guetz A, Greene MJ, Holmes S (2011)
Colony variation in the collective regulation of
foraging by harvester ants. Behav Ecol 22: 429–435.
27. Prabhakar B, Dektar KN, Gordon DM (2012)
The regulation of ant colony foraging activity
without spatial information. Plos Comput Biol 8:
e1002670.
28. Gordon DM (2013) The rewards of restraint in
the collective regulation of foraging by harvester
ant colonies. Nature 498: 91–93.
29. Del Vecchio D, Sontag ED (2010) Synthetic
biology: a systems engineering perspective. Igle-
sias PA, Ingalls BP, editors. Control theory and
systems biology. Cambr idge (Massachusetts);
London: MIT Press. pp. 101–124.
30. Doncic A, Skotheim JM (2013) Feedforward
regulation ensures stability and rapid reversibility
of a cellular state. Mol Cell 50: 856–868.
31. Mangan S, Alon U (2003) Structure and function
of the feed-forward loop network motif. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 100: 11980–11985.
32. Flanagan TP, Pinter-Wollman NM, Moses ME,
Gordon DM (2013) Fast and flexible: Argentine
ants recruit from nearby trails. PLoS ONE 8:
e70888.
33. Anderson ML, Finlay BL (2013) Allocating
structure to function: the strong links between
neuroplasticity and natural selection. Fron Hum
Neurosci 7: 918.
34. Sharma J, Angelucci A, Sur M (2000) Induction
of visual orientation modules in auditory cortex.
Nature 404: 841–847.
35. Gordon DM (2012) The dynamics of foraging
trails in the tropical arboreal ant Cephalotes
goniodontus. PLoS ONE 7: e50472.
PLOS Biology | www.plosbiology.org 4 March 2014 | Volume 12 | Issue 3 | e1001805