

===== PAGE 1 =====
101
Apidologie 35 (2004) 101–116
© INRA/DIB-AGIB/ EDP Sciences, 2004
DOI: 10.1051/apido:2004004
Review article
Group decision making in nest-site selection by honey bees
Thomas D. SEELEYa*, P. Kirk VISSCHERb
a Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
b Department of Entomology, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA
(Received 8 August 2003; revised 5 November 2003; accepted 30 November 2003)
Abstract – In recent years, renewed at tention has been paid to the me chanisms of group decision making
that underlie the nest-site selection process in honey bees. We review the results of these new investigations
by discussing how the recent work builds on the earlier descriptive studies of this decision-making process,
how the decision-making abilities of swarms have been tested, and how the mechanisms of this decision-
making process have been experimentally analyzed. We conclude by discussing how the scouts in a swarm
sense when their group decision making is coming to an end and so should begin stimulating their quiescent
swarm-mates to prepare for the flight to their new home. 
Apis mellifera / group decision making / honey bee / nest-site selection / swarming / waggle dance
1. INTRODUCTION
For centuries, beekeepers have known that
after a swarm leaves its hive and coalesces into
a cluster hanging from a tree branch, it
searches for a home and, if left alone, eventu-
ally departs for a new abode. Because humans
usually have hived the bivouacked swarms
they have found, and so have cut short the
bees’ process of nest-site selection, it is not
surprising that this process long remained a
deep mystery. This si tuation changed in the
1950’s when Martin Lindauer (1951, 1953,
1955) published his classic studies of house
hunting by honey bees. Lindauer discovered
that the bees seen performing waggle dances
on the surface of a swarm cluster are scouts
advertising potential nest sites, not foragers
announcing rich food sources. He then took
advantage of Karl von Frisch’s recent success
in deciphering the waggle dance communica-
tion system (von Frisch, 1946) to eavesdrop on
the “deliberations” conducted by a swarm’s
scouts as they consider a dozen or more possi-
ble dwelling places and ultimately reach
agreement on one of them. 
The next phase in the analysis of the nest-
site selection process of honey bees came in
the 1970’s when various investigators turned
their attention to the actions of scout bees at
possible nest sites rather than the activities of
these bees at the swarm cluster. Numerous
studies were conducted to address the question
of how scouts judge the quality of a potential
nest site (reviewed by Seeley, 1985; Witherell,
1985). For the races of Apis mellifera L. native
to Europe, it was learned that an attractive nest
site has a cavity volume greater than 10 liters
and an entrance hole smaller than 30 cm
2,
perched several meters  off the ground, facing
south, and located at the floor of the cavity.
Neither cavity shape nor entrance shape is
important. When insp ecting a site, a scout
invests much time in walking the inner sur-
faces of the cavity and her perception of cavity
volume is linked somehow to how much walk-
ing she must do to circumnavigate a cavity
(Seeley, 1977; Franks and Dornhaus, 2003).
* Corresponding author: tds5@cornell.edu

===== PAGE 2 =====
102 T.D. Seeley, P.K. Visscher
This research on the nest-site preferences of
bees set the stage for the development of effec-
tive bait hives (Witherell, 1985; Schmidt and
Thoenes, 1987, 1990), which have proven val-
uable in various settings, including the moni-
toring and control of swarms of Africanized
honey bees in the southwestern US (Schmidt,
1990).
Over the last few years, renewed attention
has been paid to the mechanisms of group
decision making in honey bee swarms,
essentially taking up where Lindauer left off in
the 1950’s. Ever since Lindauer published his
findings, there has been much speculation
about the mechanisms of this decision-making
process (Wilson, 1971; Griffin, 1981, 2001;
Markl, 1985) and this has made clear the need
for further analytic work. Moreover, since
Lindauer’s time, there has been a tremendous
growth in interest in how animal groups
function as adaptive units in general (Bourke
and Franks, 1995; Seeley, 1995; Sober and
Wilson, 1998) and as decision makers in
particular (Franks et al., 2002; Conradt and
Roper, 2003). A swarm of honey bees
choosing its future home is one of the most
impressive examples known of an animal
group functioning as an adaptive decision
maker. In this paper, we review what has been
learned lately about the mechanisms of group
decision making by honey bee swarms.
Before delving into these mechanisms, we
wish to draw attention to three requirements
that a swarm of bees must fulfill to succeed in
the demanding task of choosing a home. First,
it must achieve an accurate decision. A col-
ony’s success depends critically on its occupy-
ing a cavity that is sufficiently roomy to hold
the combs the colony will need for rearing its
brood and storing its honey. At the same time,
the cavity must be sufficiently tight to provide
good protection from predators, robbers, and
harsh weather. Second, it must achieve a
speedy decision. Every additional hour that a
swarm spends as an exposed cluster, hanging
from a tree branch, lowers its energy reserves
and raises its chances of being soaked by rain.
And third, it must achieve a unified decision.
A split decision would lead to swarm fragmen-
tation, which would be disastrous in most
cases given that a swarm usually has just one
queen and so can establish just one fully func-
tioning colony. Thus th e central question that
we face is this: how do the bees in a honey bee
swarm work together to produce an accurate,
speedy, and unified choice of a home?
2. RENEWING THE ANALYSIS
Since Lindauer’s work in the 1950’s, it has
been clear that only a small minority of the
bees in a swarm cluster – the scout bees – are
actively involved in the decision-making proc-
ess. The vast majority of a swarm’s members
remain quiescent until a decision has been
made and it is time to fly to the chosen site. It
has also been clear that the scout bees search
the surrounding environment for suitable nest
sites, advertise their finds by performing wag-
gle dances, and eventually come to an agree-
ment on one of these sites. What was not clear
until recently is how ex actly the scout bees
behave to produce this agreement. As a first
step toward solving this puzzle, we repeated
Lindauer’s observations of the scout bees’
dances and thus their deliberations, but using
video equipment to get a more complete pic-
ture of the scouts’ dancing than was possible
in the 1950’s (Camazine  et al., 1999; Seeley
and Buhrman, 1999). Having only pencil and
paper for recording the scout bees’ behavior,
Lindauer was greatly limited in the amount of
dance information he could record. He settled
on recording only the first dance performed by
each dancing bee; a paint mark applied to each
dancer as she performed her first dance ena-
bled him to distinguish novice dancers
(unmarked) from repeat dancers (marked).
Working nearly 50 years later and blessed with
video technology, we were able to record,
playback, and analyze every dance performed
on a swarm. Moreover, by working with small
swarms of about 4 000 bees, and labeling indi-
viduals so that they could be identified, we
were able to attribute each dance to a particu-
lar scout bee and so were able to determine the
dance history, and other behaviors, of every
bee that contributed to a swarm’s decision
making.
Figure 1 shows one of the complete dance
records of a swarm’s decision making. The
pattern resembles closely what Lindauer
reported based on his first-dance-only records.
The entire decision-mak ing process required
about 16 hours of dance activity by the scouts,

===== PAGE 3 =====
Decision making by honey bee swarms 103
spread over 3 days (a period of rain starting
around noon on day 2 extended the process
into day 3). We see that during the first half of
the decision-making process, the scout bees
reported all 11 of the potential nest sites that
they would consider. We can also see that dur-
ing the first half of the process no one site
dominated the dancing; during the second half,
however, one of the sites gradually began to be
advertised much more than the others. Indeed,
during the last few hours of the decision
making, the site that had emerged as the front-
runner (site G) becam e the object of all
the dances – more than 3000 waggle runs –
performed on the swarm. By the end, there
was unanimity among the dancing bees. 
This initial work confirmed many of the
features of the swar m bees’ decision-making
process that had been previously reported by
Lindauer based on his partial records of the
dancing on swarms. These features include:
(1) the scout bees locate potential nest sites in
all directions and at distances of up to several
kilometers from the swarm; (2) initially, the
scout bees advertise a dozen or more potential
nest sites but eventually they advertise just one
site; (3) within an hour or so of the appearance
of unanimity among th e dancers, the swarm
Figure 1. History of a swarm’s decision-making process from the time that the first potential nest site was
advertised on the swarm (shortly after 11:00 hours on July 20, 1997) to when it lifted off to fly to its new
home (at 11:58 hours on July 22, 1997). The circle within each of the panels represents the location of the
swarm; each arrow pointing out from the circle indicates the distance and direction of a potential nest site;
the width of each arrow denotes the number of different bees that danced for the site in the time period
shown. The set of numbers at the tip of each arrow denotes three things: top the number of bees that danced
for the site, middle the number of waggle runs performed for the site, bottom the mean number of waggle
runs per dance for the site. The numbers after “bees”, “dances”, and “waggle runs” within each panel denote
the total number of each (summed over all the potential nest sites) for the time period shown. (From Behav.
Ecol. Sociobiol. 45, Seeley and Buhrman, 1999, © Springer-Verlag.)

===== PAGE 4 =====
104 T.D. Seeley, P.K. Visscher
lifts off; (4) there is a crescendo of dancing just
before liftoff; and (5) the chosen site is not
necessarily the one that is first advertised on
the swarm. Furthermore,  the analysis of the
dancing records of individual scout bees con-
firmed something else that Lindauer had sus-
pected, which is that there is much turnover in
the dancing bees over the course of a decision-
making process. Most bees that dance for a site
cease doing so after a few hours, letting the
next “generation” of dancers carry on the
deliberations. Thus it became clear that a
swarm’s choice of a future home is broadly
distributed among the scout bees, and that this
leaderless process of group decision-making
consists of a friendly competition among the
different groups of dancers representing the
different potential nest sites. The groups com-
pete for additional dancers. Sooner or later,
one group of dancers grows numerous and
ultimately excludes its competitors. The site
whose dancers prevail in this winners-take-all
contest becomes the swarm’s new home.
3. TESTING A SW ARM’S
DECISION-MAKING ABILITY
Watching the dancing bees on a swarm
build a consensus for a nest site naturally
raises the following question: is the site that
wins in the competition for dancers the best of
the sites that the scout bees have found? The
results of a recent study (Seeley and Buhrman,
2001) indicate that swar ms are indeed gener-
ally successful in employing the best-of-N
decision rule: sample  some number (N) of
alternatives and then select the best one. In this
study, five swarms of bees were transported
one at a time to a windswept, brush-covered
island along the coast of Maine, which had few
natural nest sites. There each swarm was
presented with an array of five nest boxes;
four provided a mediocre but acceptable home
site – a 15-liter cavity – and one offered an
excellent home site – a 40-liter cavity. The
record of each swarm’s search for and choice
among these five alternative nest sites is
shown in Figure 2. We see that in each case the
scout bees discovered one or more of the
mediocre sites well before they located the
excellent site, sometimes several hours in
advance, and that they recruited other bees to
the mediocre site. However, we also see in
each case, except trial 4, that as soon as the
excellent site was discovered the bees
recruited very strongly to this site and that
within a few hours the number of scout bees at
the excellent site greatly exceeded the number
at any of the mediocre  sites. Ultimately, each
swarm, except the fourth , lifted off and flew
toward the excellent site. Thus, in four out of
five trials, swarms selected the best site, an
outcome that is ex tremely unlikely ( P =
0.0064) to have occurred simply by chance.
4. ANALYZING THE 
DECISION-MAKING PROCESS
As mentioned already, a key requirement of
the decision-making process of honey bee
swarms is that it produ ces a unified decision,
for ultimately a swarm will occupy just one
nest site. It is, theref ore, not surprising that
before a swarm lifts off to fly to its chosen site,
almost always the dancers on the swarm have
reached an agreement su ch that all of their
dances indicate a single  location. (Below we
will discuss what happens when a swarm mis-
takenly lifts off before the dancers have
reached an agreement,  and what these mis-
takes reveal about how the bees control their
preparations fo r liftoff.) Only recently, how-
ever, have we gained a clear picture of how the
scouts behave so that eventually all of their
dances are performed for one of the several
sites under consideration, usually the best one.
How do the scouts build a consensus for the
best site? The descriptive studies discussed
above indicate that the essence of the nest-site
selection process is a friendly competition
among the scouts “committed” to the various
potential nest sites. Each coalition of scouts
committed to a particular site competes with
the other coalitions for additional members
drawn from the pool of uncommitted scouts.
For the basic situation of a choice between two
sites, the swarm bees’ decision-making proc-
ess can be conceptualized with the simple pair
of equations that were put forth by Winsor
(1934) (cited by Hutchinson, 1978) early in
the history of ecological competition theory:
dN
1/dt = r1N1U – a1N1 (1)
dN2/dt = r2N2U – a2N2 (2)

===== PAGE 5 =====
Decision making by honey bee swarms 105
Figure 2. Results of five trials of a test of the ability of swarms to select the best of available nest sites. Five
nest boxes were arranged in a fan- shaped array with each box 230–250 m from the swarm. One nest box
was an excellent nest site (40-L cavity) while the othe r four were only mediocre  sites (15-L cavities). A
count of the number of scout bees visible at each nest box was made every 30 min. In each trial, one or more
of the mediocre sites was discovered 1–14 hours before the excellent site. Nevertheless, by the end of each
trial, except the fourth, the swarm chose the 40-L site. Thus we see that most of these swarms were accurate
decision makers. (From Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 49, Seeley and Buhrman, 2001, © Springer-Verlag.)

===== PAGE 6 =====
106 T.D. Seeley, P.K. Visscher
Ni is the number of scouts committed to site i,
U is the number of uncommitted scouts (the
resource being competed for), r
i is the
recruitment (“birth”) rate per scout committed
to site i, and a i is the abandonment (“death”)
rate per scout committed to site i. Integrating
and eliminating U from the two equations
yields
.( 3 )
Thus if the scouts behave with a higher per
capita rate of recruitment to site 1 than site 2,
and a higher per capita rate of abandonment of
site 2 than site 1, then the quantity (r
1a2 – r2a1)
has a positive value and the ratio on the left
side of equation (3) is increasing. This implies
the gradual elimination of the coalition of
scouts committed to site 2. In ecological the-
ory, these equations are useful as perhaps the
simplest expression of  the principle of com-
petitive exclusion. They are useful in the
present context by showing how differences
in per capita rates of r ecruitment to and aban-
donment of different potential nest sites are
sufficient to produce a clear winner in the
competition among coalitions of scout bees. In
this model, the competition is for a single
resource – uncommitted scout bees – and
occurs purely by exploitation. In principle, the
competition among coalitions could also
involve interference, with scouts of a given
coalition directly inhibiting the growth of the
other coalitions, and this possibility will be
considered below.
There is now solid evidence that scouts do
adjust their behavior in relation to site quality
so that the best site has both the highest per
capita rate of recruitment (r
i) and the lowest
per capita rate of abandonment (a i). Lindauer
(1955) stated that scouts reporting better sites
perform longer and livelier dances (which
should result in a higher per capita recruitment
rate), but his evidence was only anecdotal.
Seeley and Buhrman (2001) obtained experi-
mental evidence in support of Lindauer’s
claim. Their approach was to present a swarm
with both an excellent (40 L) nest box and a
mediocre (15 L) nest box, and then to video
record the scout bees’ dances for the two nest
boxes as they were performed side-by-side on
the swarm. This experiment was performed
with two swarms and in both cases they found
that the dances for the excellent nest box were
stronger than those for the mediocre nest box,
there being on average 36 and 14 waggle runs
per dance for the excellent and mediocre nest
boxes, respectively. They also found that
Lindauer was indeed correct when he stated
that better sites elicit dances that are both
longer and livelier than those elicited by
poorer sites. Specifically, Seeley and Buhrman
found that a scout bee tunes her dance strength
by adjusting the number of waggle runs/dance,
and that she adjusts the number of waggle
runs/dance (W) by changing both the duration
(D) and the rate (R) of her waggle-run produc-
tion (note that W = D × R). Further analysis of
the video recorded dances revealed that a
dancing bee adjusts the rate of her waggle-run
production by changing the mean duration of
the return-phase portion of her dance circuits.
Evidently, it was these differences in return-
phase duration that gave Lindauer (1955) the
impression that dances differ in liveliness.
The rate of recruitment by a dance-produc-
ing scout bee depends not only on how
strongly she dances (number of waggle runs
per dance), but also on how the dance-follow-
ing scouts sample and respond to the various
dances being performed on the surface of a
swarm. The simplest possibility is that when a
scout decides to follow a dance, she chooses a
dancer at random and heeds her dance. If so,
then the greater the per capita production of
waggle runs for a site, the higher will be
the per capita rate of recruitment to the site.
Visscher and Camazine (1999) report evi-
dence that scouts do indeed follow dances cho-
sen at random. In a dese rt area, they provided
a swarm with two nest boxes – one east and
one west of the swarm – and they labeled each
dancer for individual identification when she
first danced for one of the nest boxes. They
also videotaped all dancing and eventual
dance following by the labeled bees through-
out the swarm’s deci sion-making process.
When they examined how much time the
labeled bees spent following dances for the
east and west nest boxes, they found that they
followed dances for each site in proportion to
the total amount of dancing by other bees for
the site, as shown in Figure 3. Evidently, when
the labeled bees switched from dance produc-
ing to dance following (discussed further
below), they showed no preference for either
the dances advertising the site they had already
N
1
r2 N2
r
1⁄ Ce r1a2 r2a1–() t=

===== PAGE 7 =====
Decision making by honey bee swarms 107
visited or the dances for the other site, and
instead simply followed dances chosen at
random.
So far we have considered only how scout
bees committed to a site recruit other scouts to
their site (i.e., what determines r
i). Let us now
consider instead how the scout bees commit-
ted to a site abandon this site, that is, how they
stop dancing for and stop making visits to the
site, and so terminate their commitment to the
site (i.e., what determines a
i). This is one of the
most curious features of the decision-making
process of honey bee swarms. To conceptual-
ize the matter, it is useful to recognize two
classes of hypotheses for why a scout aban-
dons a site: H1, an internal stimulus causes her
to abandon a site; and H2, an external stimulus
causes her to abandon a site. (Note: we know
that scouts do not abandon their sites simply
because they are dying.  Seeley and Buhrman
(1999) measured the mortality rate of scout
bees in 3 swarms and found it to be low, with
only 6% of the scouts dying over the course of
the decision-making process.)
Hypothesis 1 is based upon the observation,
made repeatedly in the descriptive studies
(Lindauer, 1955; Camazine et al., 1999;
Seeley and Buhrman, 1999) that scouts visit-
ing nest sites rather quickly lose interest in
their sites. With respect to dancing, for
example, most scouts s how a statistically sig-
nificant tapering off over several hours in the
number of waggle runs performed per dance.
(Lindauer aptly called this a decline in Tanz-
lust.) Even scouts that start out visiting the
ultimately chosen site, which presumably
remains a high-quality site throughout the
decision-making proces s, eventually cease
performing dances for and stop making visits
to this site. The fact that even scouts commit-
ted to the chosen site eventually abandon this
site suggests strongly that the scouts’ loss of
interest is not the result of an external influ-
ence associated with being committed to an
inferior site – for example, experiencing at the
site a weak buildup of scouts or encountering
at the swarm a vigorous dance for an alterna-
tive site – but is instead the result of an inter-
nally programmed process. One can argue that
it may be highly adaptive for scouts to be pro-
grammed to eventually abandon their sites,
because it could help prevent the decision-
making process from becoming deadlocked
due to unyielding scouts dancing for two or
more sites.
Hypothesis 2 is based upon the observa-
tions made by Lindauer (1955) of 3 scout bees
that stopped visiting one site at about the same
time they started following dances for and
began making visits to a second site. Lindauer
(1971, 1975), Griffin (1992) and Gould and
Gould (1994) have pointed out that these
observations suggest that scouts will abandon
one site only after they have followed dances
for, inspected, and so gained interest in a supe-
rior site. “Bees that had visited a cavity of
mediocre quality sometimes became followers
of more enthusiastic dances than their own.
Then some of them visited the better cavity
they had learned about as followers of vigor-
ous dances, returned, and danced appropri-
ately with respect to the superior cavity they
had now visited” (Griffi n, 1992, p. 193). If
bees decide to abandon a site only after they
have learned about a superior site, it would be
strong support for hypot hesis 2, because it
would appear that information about a supe-
rior site (an external stimulus) is what causes a
scout to abandon a site. However, the temporal
relationship between abandonment of one site
and recruitment to a second site was, until
recently, unclear. It may be that scouts gener-
ally lose interest in one site even before they
learn about a second site. If so, then this would
be evidence against hypothesis 2, because it
Figure 3. Scout bees that had originally danced for
one of two available nest boxes (east or west) could
later follow dances for each site. The expected
amounts of dance followi ng by each class of bees
for each site (Exp) were calculated by parceling out
total time each labeled dancer followed dances
according to the distribution of dances available for
her to follow. The actual distribution of dance
following (Obs) closely ma tched this expectation,
showing that scouts were not selective either for
novel or familiar sites. (From Nature 397, Visscher
and Camazine, 1999, © Nature Publishing Group.)

===== PAGE 8 =====
108 T.D. Seeley, P.K. Visscher
would appear that the external stimulus of
information about a superior site is not needed
for a scout to abandon a site. It should be noted
that the “before” scenario is supported by
Lindauer’s (1955) original observations. Each
of the 3 scouts that he reported on stopped pro-
ducing dances for (hence evidently was losing
interest in) her first site well before she began
following dances for her second site. 
A recent study (Seeley, 2003) has add-
ressed the critical issue of whether scouts
that abandon a site do so only after they have
followed dances for and made visits to a supe-
rior site (as predicted by hypothesis 2), or
whether they will abandon a site even before
they have experienced these external stimuli
(as predicted by hypothesis 1). The behaviors
of the first few (4–8) bees that performed
dances in each of 6 sw arms were monitored
from the start of each bee’s dancing to the end
of her swarm’s decision making. Because just
a few scouts were monitored in each swarm, it
was possible to record each time a focal scout
left the swarm, return ed to the swarm, pro-
duced a waggle dance, or followed a waggle
dance. A total of 37 scout bees were observed,
and 33 of them abandoned (ceased dancing
for) the sites that they originally advertised
with their dances. The critical finding was that
only one of these 33 abandoners ceased danc-
ing for her initial site after she began follow-
ing dances for other sites. Most (32 out of 33)
of these scouts lost interest in their sites with-
out being influenced by the dances of other
scouts, a fact which tends to contradict
hypothesis 2. Instead, it looks like these bees
lost on their own (without external influence)
their motivation to dance for their initial sites.
A further piece of evid ence that supports the
internal stimulus hypothesis is the finding that
the number of waggle runs produced by each
bee for her initial site declined noticeably over
her consecutive returns to the swarm and, as is
shown in Figure 4, the pattern of decline in
dancing per return to the swarm is strikingly
linear. This linearity suggests that the pattern
arises from an intern al, neurophysiological
process that automatically drives down a
scout’s motivation to dance for a site. This
decline of dancing over repeated visits to a
nest site appears to be a special feature of
dancing in the context of house hunting; bees
dancing in the context of nectar foraging do
not show a decline in dancing over repeated
visits to a food source (Seeley, 1994, Visscher,
2003). 
Another important finding in the Seeley
(2003) study is that the scout bees showed
signs of adjusting their per capita rates of
abandonment in relation to the quality of the
site that each bee was advertising. Bees that
performed dances for their swarm’s chosen
site (presumably a superior site) produced
strong initial dances (mean number of waggle
runs: 86.0) and continued producing dances
over many (5–6) returns to the swarm. In com-
parison, bees that performed dances for one of
their swarm’s nonchosen sites (presumably
sites inferior to the chosen one) produced
weaker initial dances (mean number of waggle
runs: 34.8) and danced over fewer (1–5)
Figure 4. The number of waggle runs danced for a
given site over consecutive returns to the swarm.
Each of 37 scouts made 1–6 consecutive returns to
the swarm with dancing and a final return without
dancing (= 0 waggle runs /return). Some produced
such a series for more than one site, so 51 series are
included. The results show that a scout’s tendency
to dance for a site decl ines quickly and linearly
over the course of her succ essive trips to the site.
(From Behav. Ecol. Soci obiol. 53, Seeley, 2003,
© Springer-Verlag.)

===== PAGE 9 =====
Decision making by honey bee swarms 109
returns to the swarm. On average, therefore,
nest-site scouts from a chosen site started
stronger and lasted longer in advertising their
sites than did scouts from a nonchosen site.
It appears that scout bees have a behavioral
“rule” regarding the advertising of nest sites.
The rule seems to be as follows: upon
returning to the swarm for the first time after
visiting a possible nest site, produce a dance
whose strength (number of waggle runs)
reflects the quality of the site, and upon
making subsequent returns to the swarm,
produce dances whose strength declines by
about 15 waggle runs per return (see Fig. 4).
By following this rule, nest-site scouts from
superior sites will advertise their sites more
strongly and will abandon their sites more
slowly than will scouts from inferior sites. As
a result, the better the site, the higher the per
capita rate of recruitmen t of additional scouts
(r
i) and the lower the per capita rate of
abandonment of existing scouts (a i). As
mentioned above, such tuning of the per capita
rates of recruitment and abandonment in
relation to site quality is sufficient to explain
how a consensus among the dancing bees is
produced.
We end this section with a bit of specula-
tion. Winsor’s competition equations (1 and 2)
refer only to competition by exploitation. Do
the scouts of differen t coalitions compete
entirely by mutual exploitation of the pool of
uncommitted scout bees, or do they also com-
pete by interference, that is by directly disrupt-
ing the growth of competing coalitions? The
evidence presented above (the linear decay in
dancing) suggests that scout bees are not stop-
ping their dancing in response to external stim-
uli, but this may not be the whole story.
Worker bees can produce a mechanical signal,
the “stop signal”, that is directed at waggle
dancers and that causes them to stop dancing
(Esch, 1964; Nieh, 1993; Kirchner, 1993). So
far, the only context in which stop signals have
been studied is in th e hive, when a colony’s
nectar influx is excessive. In this situation, the
nectar foragers have difficulty finding receiver
bees to take their nectar, and these foragers
produce stop signals (u sually while tremble
dancing) to inhibit waggle dancing and the
recruitment of additional foragers (reviewed in
Seeley, 1995, pp. 162–173). However, in the
course of our studies, we have heard bees
producing stop signals in swarms. (Stop sig-
nals are easily recognized because they are
extremely brief, lasting just 0.1–0.2 s, in con-
trast to all the other acoustical signals of
worker bees which last much longer.) This
raises the possibility that the scouts in one coa-
lition could reduce the rate of recruitment of
scouts in competing coalitions. And if scouts
in different coalitions do interfere with one
another, it may happen when a scout has
switched her commitment from an inferior site
to a superior site. A scout in this situation
could contribute to the decision-making proc-
ess by inhibiting dances representing her
former, inferior site. It is known that some
scouts do cross over from inferior to superior
sites (Lindauer, 1955; Seeley and Buhrman,
1999; Camazine et al., 1999; Visscher and
Camazine, 1999). However, no one has looked
to see if crossover scouts produce stop signals
directed at dancers adve rtising inferior sites.
Visscher and Camazine (1999) have tested
whether the removal of crossover scouts slows
the decision-making process, as one would
expect if interference by crossover scouts were
important. They found no slowing. However,
in performing their removal experiment,
Visscher and Camazine used two identical
nest boxes. Hence their crossover scouts did
not experience a marked difference in quality
between the two sites. It may be that direct
experience with two sites that differ markedly
in quality is necessary  to induce a scout that
has switched sites to inhibit dances for the
inferior site. Clearly, the question of whether
the decision-making process of honey bee
swarms involves mechanisms of direct inhibi-
tion among the coalitions of dancers remains a
subject for future investigation.
5. EXPLORING HOW SWARMS 
PREPARE FOR LIFTOFF
While the scouts are busy choosing a suita-
ble nesting cavity, the other 95% of the bees in
a swarm remain quiescent and conserve the
swarm’s energy reserve: the 30–40 mg of
concentrated sugar so lution carried inside
each bee (Combs, 1972). As was shown by
Heinrich (1981), the b ees in the core of a
swarm cluster maintain a 30–40 °C microcli-
mate, by trapping the metabolic heat produced

===== PAGE 10 =====
110 T.D. Seeley, P.K. Visscher
by the resting bees and by adjusting the clus-
ter’s porosity to control its rate of heat loss.
Meanwhile, the outermost bees in a cluster
maintain themselves above a relatively low
set-point of 15 °C, thus minimizing their
energy expenditure for heat production but at
the same time keeping their flight muscles
warm enough to generate heat by shivering
(Esch, 1988). In the final 10–30 min before
liftoff, however, the temperature gradient in a
swarm cluster becomes abolished such that the
bees in the cluster’s mantle become as warm
as those at its core (Heinrich, 1981; Seeley and
Tautz, 2001). Given that a worker bee needs a
flight muscle temperature of at least 33–35 °C
for rapid flight (Esch, 1976; Heinrich, 1979), it
is not surprising that such a striking warm-up
phenomenon is observed. Using an infrared
camera to measure the thoracic (flight muscle)
temperatures of individual bees on the surface
of a swarm cluster, Seel ey et al. (2003) found
that liftoff begins just a few seconds after all
the surface-layer bees in a swarm cluster have
their flight muscles warmed to at least 35 °C.
Swarm liftoff is a dazzling display of coordi-
nated group behavior. All the bees in the
swarm cluster launch into flight in about 60 s,
form a cloud of swirling bees, and begin mov-
ing off together, with the scouts somehow
guiding all the others to their new dwelling
place (Seeley et al., 1979, reviewed by Dyer,
2000).
We now understand some of the mecha-
nisms whereby the bees in a swarm achieve
such a beautifully coordinated liftoff. One of
these is the buzz running ( Schwirrlaufen) sig-
nal. During the final 10 or so minutes before
liftoff, excited bees force their way through
the quiet bees in the cluster, running about in a
zig-zag pattern, butting into the other bees,
meanwhile buzzing their wings (Lindauer,
1955; Esch, 1967). Many, perhaps most, of
these buzz runners are scout bees and their
actions appear to loosen up the cluster (Seeley
et al., 1979). Martin (1963) demonstrated,
with a split-hive experi ment, that only bees
contacted by buzz runne rs will join the mass
exodus when a swarm in itially leaves the
parental hive. A second signal that helps acti-
vate the quiescent bees in a swarm cluster is
the shaking signal (also called the vibration
signal). To produce this signal, one bee grasps
another and shakes this bee’s body for 1–2 s at
16–18 Hz (see Fig. 1 in Seeley et al., 1998).
There is strong evidence that the shaking sig-
nal acts as a modulatory signal that produces a
general activation of wo rker bees in swarms
(Schneider et al., 1998 ; Visscher et al., 1999;
Lewis and Schneider, 2000; Donahoe et al.,
2003; reviewed in Schneider and Lewis, 2004)
and in hives (Schneider  et al., 1986; Nieh,
1998; Seeley et al.,  1998). However because
the shaking signal does not occur solely or
even principally in the last hour before liftoff,
it seems that the shaking signal is not the sig-
nal that informs the relatively cool bees in a
swarm that it is time to warm up for liftoff.
The principal warm-up signal is evidently
the high-pitched piping signal that is produced
during the last hour or so before departure
(Lindauer, 1955; Seeley et al., 1979;
Camazine et al., 1999). Seeley and Tautz
(2001) investigated the origins and effects of
this signal. They found that each piper is an
excited bee that scrambles through the swarm
cluster, pausing every second or so to press her
thorax against anothe r bee, pull her wings
together over her abdomen, and activate her
wing muscles to produce an audible vibration
(though probably most of the vibrational
energy is loaded into the contacted bee). Each
pipe is a pulse of vibration which lasts 0.82 ±
0.43 s and rises in fundamental frequency
from 100–200 Hz to 200–250 Hz. Many, if
not all, of the pipers are scouts. The time-
course of worker piping matches that of swarm
warming – both start at a low level about an
hour before liftoff and both build to a climax at
liftoff – which suggests that the scouts use this
signal to stimulate their swarm mates to warm
up. The results of an exclusion experiment
also support this view of the function of
worker piping. When pipers were excluded
from a subset of bees hanging in the cool, out-
ermost layer of a swarm cluster, it was found
that these bees did not  warm up, unlike adja-
cent bees that were contacted by pipers. It
should be noted that the form of worker piping
that occurs in swarms  (“wings-together pip-
ing”) is distinct from the form of worker pip-
ing that has been observed in hives (“wings-
apart piping”) (Ohtani and Kamada, 1980;
Pratt et al., 1996). The function of the wings-
apart piping signal remains a challenging
mystery.

===== PAGE 11 =====
Decision making by honey bee swarms 111
How do the scout bees sense when it is
appropriate for them to begin producing the
piping signals and so start stimulating their
swarm-mates to prepare for the flight to their
new home? Seeley and Visscher (2003) tested
two hypotheses: “consensus sensing”, the
scouts noting when all the bees performing
waggle dances are advertising just one site;
and “quorum sensing”, the scouts noting when
one site is being visited by a sufficiently large
number of scouts. To test these hypotheses,
they monitored four sw arms as they discov-
ered, recruited to, and chose between two nest
boxes and as their scouts started producing
piping signals. They found that a consensus
among the dancers was neither necessary nor
sufficient for the start of worker piping, which
indicates that the cons ensus-sensing hypothe-
sis is false. They also found that a buildup of
10–15 or more bees at one of the nest boxes
was consistently associ ated with the start of
worker piping, which in dicates that the quo-
rum-sensing hypothesis may be true (Fig. 5).
Recently, they tested experimentally the
Figure 5. Results from monitoring a swarm as its scout bees chose between two potential nest sites (one a
nest box and the other a site in an old house) and then began preparing for liftoff, which is indicated by the
start of worker piping. At the swarm, we recorded the intensity of worker piping every 5 min and the number
of waggle runs that were produced for each site in 20 min intervals before liftoff. At the potential nest sites,
we recorded the number of scout bees outside and inside each site every 5 min, except when one of the sites
was an unidentified location in an old house. Note how every time the number of scouts inside the nest box
rose well above 10 bees, piping began to be heard at the swarm, and how when the count fell to 10 or fewer
bees, the piping decreased, usuall y stopping altogether. Note too that  there was a consensus among the
dancers throughout. (From Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 54, Seeley and Visscher, 2003, © Springer-Verlag.)

===== PAGE 12 =====
112 T.D. Seeley, P.K. Visscher
quorum-sensing hypothesis by seeing if they
could delay the start of piping by slowing the
buildup of scouts (i.e., quorum formation) at
the chosen site but without disturbing anything
else about the nest-site selection process
(Seeley and Visscher, unpublished results). To
do this, they presented swarms, one at a time,
with five nest boxes together at one site, and
they monitored the buildup of scouts at the
nest boxes and the start of piping at the swarm.
For comparison, they performed another trial
with each swarm but with just one nest box at
a site (different sites were used for the 1-nest-
box and the 5-nest-box trials; also, the order of
the 1- and 5-nest-box trials was reversed
between consecutive swarms). They observed
that the buildup of scout bees at a nest box was
slower in the 5-nest-box trials (the recruits
spread themselves among the nest boxes) than
in the 1-nest-box trials (the recruits assembled
at the single nest box), and that the onset of
piping was much delayed in the 5-nest-box
trials relative to the 1-nest-box trials. These
results strongly support the quorum-sensing
hypothesis, but leave open the question of how
the scouts are sensing a quorum at the chosen
site.
An intriguing question is why the scouts
don’t use consensus sensing and instead use
quorum sensing. This question is particularly
piquant given that a cons ensus, or at least a
near consensus, among the dancers is required
for a swarm to execute a successful move to a
new home site. In three reported instances of a
swarm lifting off when its dancers were
strongly split between two sites (the Balcony
and Moosach swarms of Lindauer, 1955, and
swarm 3 of Seeley and Visscher, 2003), the
airborne swarm divided, stalled in its move,
and resettled. (Note: the occasional occurrence
of liftoffs without consensus is further support
for the quorum-sensing hypothesis.) Two of
these swarms went on to achieve a dance
consensus and a successful move, but one lost
its queen when it split itself in midair and so
experienced a complete failure. One possible
reason for why the bees use quorum sensing
is that it would be exceedingly difficult or
costly for the scouts to sense a consensus
among themselves as th ey perform dances on
a swarm, for to do so would presumably
require that each scout poll the dances by
traveling over the swarm cluster, reading some
sample of the dances, and keeping a tally of
her readings. Another possible reason for
using quorum sensing is that it provides an
advantage in the speed of the decision making,
by enabling the bees to begin preparations for
liftoff as soon as enough of the scout bees, but
not all of them, have approved of one of the
potential nest sites. Presumably the reason that
most liftoffs occur when there is a consensus
among the dancers, ev en though a consensus
is not the trigger for the start of liftoff
preparations, is because there is the strong
positive feedback process of vigorous dancing
for the chosen site, which attracts more and
more dancing for this superior site. It may be
too that the quorum size has been tuned by
natural selection to be sufficiently high to
ensure that almost always a dance consensus is
produced for a site shortly after a quorum of
scouts is reached at this site.
6. SW ARM SMARTS
In closing, we draw attention to two fea-
tures of the group decision-making process
that we have just discussed, features that con-
tribute importantly to a swarm’s success in
choosing a new home. Let us not forget that
each of these successes is a remarkable
achievement. For while it is true that a
swarm’s decision making is simplified by hav-
ing a clear and stable problem (i.e., find a sin-
gle, suitable nest site), it is also complicated by
the realities that the information used in this
decision making is incomplete (at least early
on), sometimes inaccurate (as when a scout
dances weakly for a high-quality site; see
Swarm 4 in Fig. 2), and steadily changing .
Such informational messiness makes it diffi-
cult to apply the classical and powerful
approach to decision making – identify alter-
natives, evaluate these options, and choose the
one with the highest value – but swarms man-
age to do so. What are their secrets of success?
One is the use of dozens, if not hundreds, of
scout bees that independently, widely, and
simultaneously explore for potential nest sites.
These scouts bring back to the swarm cluster
heterogeneous information – knowledge of
superb, mediocre, and even lousy sites – which
is then shared with th e other scouts by means
of waggle dances. The important thing is that

===== PAGE 13 =====
Decision making by honey bee swarms 113
all discoveries of acceptable nest sites are
freely reported; no scout is stifled. Thus a
swarm takes advantage of its collective nature
to assemble rather quickly, often in just a few
hours (see Fig. 1), a large set of alternatives
from which to choose. The larger this set, the
more likely it includes a first-rate site.
A second important f eature of the bee’s
decision-making process becomes apparent
when we consider how the scouts solve the
problem of finding the best of this large set of
alternatives. At most, any individual has direct
experience with only a few of these sites, but
the decision-making process must compare all
the sites. We have described already how the
solution to this problem arises through a proc-
ess of friendly competition among the scouts,
with the various coalitions of scouts commit-
ted to different sites vying to attract uncom-
mitted scouts. We have explained how the
members of each coalition attract additional
members by performing waggle dances that
are graded in strength in relation to site qual-
ity, so that the higher the site quality, the
stronger the dance, a nd the greater the stream
of newcomers to it. Furthermore, the appar-
ently endogenously programmed extinction of
Tanzlust helps sharpen the differences in
recruitment. But what we have not yet pointed
out is that the bees have an important check on
the positive feedback that will occur as danc-
ers beget more dancers: a dance follower does
not blindly imitate the dancer that she has fol-
lowed. Instead, she leav es the swarm cluster,
examines the advertised site, and only if she
too judges that it is a worthy site does she pro-
duce a dance for it. In this way the population
of scouts avoids possible runaway feedback in
dancing for a poor site that happens to be dis-
covered quickly. The procedure of inspecting
a site before advertising it also provides the
basis for the scouts d eciding when the deci-
sion-making process has progressed suffi-
ciently far for them to shift to stimulating
swarm liftoff.
These considerations illustrate how the
story of house hunting by honey bees contains
valuable lessons about effective decision mak-
ing by groups. There is no need for any indi-
vidual to possess a global view of the alterna-
tives, nor for any mechanism to tally and
compare “votes” for them . The “smarts” of a
swarm derives from a combination of many
individuals working in parallel, each one
making sophisticated assessments of nest-site
properties, and a group process of feedback
in recruitment, modulated by these quality
assessments and amplified by the house-hunt-
ing-specific decay of Tanzlust. Together, these
lead a swarm to an accurate, speedy, and uni-
fied decision.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to the National Science Founda-
tion, the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, the
National Geographic Society, and the University of
California-Riverside Academic Senate. Their finan-
cial support made possible many of the studies dis-
cussed in this article.
Résumé – Prise collective de décision dans le
choix du site de nidification chez l’Abeille
domestique. Une attention renouvelée a récem-
ment été portée aux mécani smes de prise de déci-
sion collective chez les essaims d’abeilles domesti-
ques (Apis mellifera L.) en se basant sur les études
faites par Lindauer dans les années 50. Nous pas-
sons en revue les connai ssances récentes sur la
fonction d’un essaim dans la prise de décision.
Une première étape dans l’étude renouvelée du pro-
cessus de choix du site de nidification a été de faire
une description complète, à l’aide d’enregistre-
ments vidéo, des danses des éclaireuses, et donc de
leurs délibérations. Ceci a confirmé les traits fonda-
mentaux du processus de prise de décision : les
éclaireuses cherchent partout des sites potentiels de
nidification, elles recrutent d’abord par les danses
frétillantes pour de nombr eux sites, pui s ne recru-
tent éventuellement que p our un seul site et, peu
après l’apparition d’un consensus parmi les danseu-
ses, l’essaim s’envole vers le site choisi. Ce travail
a aussi montré le taux élevé de renouvellement des
danseuses au cours de la prise de décision de
l’essaim. Les nouvelles ét udes descriptives ont
généralement confirmé que le choix d’un domicile
par l’essaim consiste en  une compétition amicale
pour gagner de nouvelles  danseuses entre groupes
de danseuses représentant les divers sites potentiels.
Un test a été réalisé sur la précision de la prise de
décision par les essaims. Il a montré que les essaims
réussissent généralement  à présenter un certain
nombre N d’alternatives et choisissent ensuite la
meilleure (i.e. ils utilisen t la règle de décision « le
meilleur de N »).
De nombreux travaux ont cherché à comprendre
comment les éclaireuses se comportent pour pro-
duire finalement une da nse consensuelle pour le
meilleur site de nidifica tion. En principe cela se
produit si les éclaireuses agissent de façon à ce que
le meilleur site ait le plus fort taux de recrutement et

===== PAGE 14 =====
114 T.D. Seeley, P.K. Visscher
le plus faible taux d’abandon par tête. On sait main-
tenant que les éclaireuses qui produisent la danse
règlent la force de leur danse frétillante ( = nombre
de trajets frétillants par da nse) selon la qualité du
site et que celles qui suivent la danse choisissent au
hasard la danse à suivre. Le taux de recrutement par
tête est une fonction positive de la qualité du site de
nidification. On a aussi maintenant la preuve que les
éclaireuses ajustent le taux d’abandon par tête en
fonction de la qualité du site. Bien que les éclaireu-
ses puissent éventuellement abandonner un site
(cesser de danser pour lui), meilleur est le site, plus
longtemps l’éclaireuse dansera pour lui.
Peu avant qu’un essaim s’envole pour son nouveau
domicile, les abeilles éc hauffent leurs muscles de
vol jusqu’à atteindre au moins 35 °C. Les éclaireu-
ses produisent un chant en rassemblant leurs ailes
pour inciter leurs consoeurs au repos à s’échauffer
pour l’envol. Les éclaireuses décident curieusement
du moment où elles se mettent à chanter lorsqu’elles
sentent la formation d’ un quorum d’éclaireuses
pour le site choisi et non pas un consensus dans la
danse sur la grappe de l’essaim. Ce sentiment de
quorum peut servir à accélé rer la prise de décision
de l’essaim.
Apis mellifera / décision collective / choix / site de
nidification / essaimage / danse frétillante
Zusammenfassung – Gruppenentscheidung bei
der Nestsuche der Honigbienen.  In den letzten
Jahren wurde die Aufm erksamkeit erneut auf
den Mechanismus der Gruppenentscheidung bei
Schwärmen der Honigbienen gerichtet, die auf den
Untersuchungen von Lindauer in den 1950er Jahren
basieren. Wir geben eine Übersicht über neuere
Erkenntnisse über die Funktion eines Schwarms bei
der Fassung von Entscheidungen.
Ein erster Schritt bei der erneuten Untersuchung
über den Entscheidungsprozess während der Suche
nach einer geeigneten Nisthöhle bestand aus Video
Aufnahmen, die eine vollständige Beschreibung der
Tänze aller Kundschaf terbienen und damit von
ihren Beurteilungen ermöglic hte. Hierbei bestätig-
ten sich die wichtigsten Grundzüge des Ent-
scheidungsprozesses: Kundschafter suchen überall
nach Nistmöglichkeiten, anfangs werben sie für
viele Nistgelegenheiten mit Schwänzeltänzen, aber
allmählich werben sie nur noch für einen Nistplatz
und kurz nach der Einigung de r Tänzer fliegt der
Schwarm zur erwählten Nisthöhle. Di ese Filme
dokumentieren auch eine hohe Zahl von Umgrup-
pierungen der Tänzer während des Entscheidungs-
prozesses des Schwarms . Insgesamt haben die
neuen Beobachtungen bestätigt, dass die Wahl des
Schwarmes für eine neue Nisthöhle aus einer fried-
lichen Konkurrenz bei der Anwerbung von Tänzern
zwischen den verschiede nen Gruppen ist, die
Nistmöglichkeiten vorstellen.
Es wurde ein Test über die Genauigke it der Ent-
scheidungsfindung im Schwarm durchgeführt.
Dabei zeigte sich, dass Schwärme im allgemeinen
erfolgreich eine Anzahl (N) von alternativen
Nistmöglichkeiten aufzeigen und dann den besten
auswählen (i.e., Anwendung der “besten–von-N”
Entscheidungsregel).
Viele Arbeiten konzentrierten sich auf eine
Aufklärung des Verhaltens  der Kundschafter, das
zum Schluss zu einem ei nheitlichen Tanz für die
beste Nistgelegenheit führt.  Im Prinzip geschieht
das, wenn es den Kundscha ftern gelingt, die meis-
ten Einzelbienen (pro Kopf) zu rekrutieren und
gleichzeitig den gerings ten Verlust zu haben.
Inzwischen ist bekannt, dass die tanzenden Kund-
schafterinnen die Stärke ihres Schwänzeltanzes mit
der Qualität des Nistpl atzes abstimmen (=Anzahl
von Schwänzelläufen pro Tanz), und dass die
der Tänzerin nachfolgenden Kundschafterinnen
zufällig einem Tanz folgen. Eine pro Kopf Rate von
Neulingen hat eine ei nigende Wirkung und zeigt
eine positive Reaktion auf der Qualität des Nistplat-
zes an. Auch gibt es jetzt Befunde, dass Kundschaf-
terinnen die pro Kopf Rate von den Tanz verlassen-
den Bienen in Bezug zur Qualität setzen. Obwohl
alle Kundschafterinnen nach und nach aufhören
(nicht mehr für den Platz tanzen), tanzen sie doch
länger, je besser der Platz ist.
Kurz bevor der Schwar m startet und zu seinem
neuen Heim fliegt, wärmen  die Bienen ihre Flug-
muskeln auf mindestens 35 °C auf. Die Kundschaf-
terinnen erzeugen ein Pi ping Signal durch Zusam-
menlegung ihrer Flügel , das zur Stimulierung
ihrer ruhig gebliebenen Schwarmgenossinnen zur
Aufwärmung für den Abflug führt. Seltsamerweise
entscheiden die Kundschafterinnen über den Beginn
des Piping Signals. Sie erkennen die Entscheidung
einer ausreichenden Zahl an Kundschafterinnen für
einen Platz, sie messen nicht die Einigung im Tanz
auf der Traube. Dieses Gefühl für ein Quorum mag
dazu dienen, die Entscheidungsfindung zu be-
schleunigen. 
Apis mellifera  / Findung einer Gruppenent-
scheidung / Wahl des Nistplatzes / Schwärmen /
Schwänzeltanz 
REFERENCES
Bourke A., Franks N.R. (1 995) Social evolution in
ants, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New
Jersey.
Camazine S., Visscher P.K., Finley J., Vetter R.S.
(1999) House-hunting by honey bee swarms:
collective decisions a nd individual behaviors,
Insectes Soc. 46, 348–360.
Combs G.F. (1972) The engorgement of swarming
worker honeybees, J. Apic. Res. 11, 121–128.
Conradt L., Roper T.J. (2003) Group decision-making
in animals, Nature 421, 155–158.
Donahoe K., Lewis L.A., Schneider S.S. (2003) The
role of the vibration signal in the house-hunting

===== PAGE 15 =====
Decision making by honey bee swarms 115
process of honey bee ( Apis mellifera ) swarms,
Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 54, 593–600.
Dyer F.C. (2000) Group movement and individual
cognition: lessons from social insects, in: Boinski
S., Garber P.A. (Eds.), On the move: how and
why animals travel in groups, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 127–164.
Esch H. (1964) Beiträge zum Problem der Entfer-
nungsweisung in den Schwänzeltänzen der
Honigbiene, Z. Vergl. Physiol. 48, 534–546.
Esch H. (1967) The sounds produced by swarming
honey bees, Z. Vergl. Physiol. 56, 408–411.
Esch H. (1976) Body temperature and flight perform-
ance of honey bees in a servomechanically con-
trolled wind tunnel, J. Comp. Physiol. 109, 264–
277.
Esch H. (1988) The effect s of temperature on flight
muscle potentials in honeybees and cuculiinid
winter moths, J. Exp. Biol. 135, 109–117.
Franks N.R., Dornhaus A. (2003) How might individ-
ual honeybees measure massive volumes, Proc.
R. Soc. London B (Suppl.) 270, S181–S182.
Franks N.R., Pratt S.C., Mallon E.A.B., Britton N.F.,
Sumpter D.J.T. (2002) Information flow, opinion
polling and collective intelligence in house-
hunting social insects, Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
London B 337, 1567–1583.
Frisch K. von (1946) Die Tänze der Bienen, Österr.
Zool. Z. 1, 1–48.
Gould J.L., Gould C.G. (1994) The animal mind,
Scientific American Library, New York.
Griffin D.R. (1981) The question of animal aware-
ness, Rockefeller University Press, New York.
Griffin D.R. (1992) Anim al minds, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Griffin D.R. (2001) Animal minds: beyond cognition
to consciousness, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Heinrich B. (1979) Thermoregulation of African and
European honeybees during foraging, attack, and
hive exits and returns, J. Exp. Biol. 80, 217–229.
Heinrich B. (1981) The mechanisms and energetics of
honeybee swarm temperature regulation, J. Exp.
Biol. 91, 25–55.
Hutchinson G.E. (1978) An introduction to popula-
tion ecology, Yale University Press, New Haven.
Kirchner W.H. (1993) Vibr ational signals in the
tremble dance of the honeybee, Apis mellifera,
Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 33, 169–172.
Lewis L.A., Schneider S.S. (2000) The modulation of
worker behavior by the vibration signal during
house hunting in swarms of the honeybee, Apis
mellifera, Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 48, 154–164.
Lindauer M. (1951) Bienentänze in der Schwarm-
traube, Naturwissenschaften 38, 509–513.
Lindauer M. (1953) Bienentänze in der Schwarm-
traube. II, Naturwissenschaften 40, 379–385.
Lindauer M. (1955) Schwarmbienen auf Wohnungs-
suche, Z. Vergl. Physiol. 37, 263–324.
Lindauer M. (1971) Communication among social
bees, 2nd ed., Harvard University Press, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts.
Lindauer M. (1975) Verstä ndigung im Bienenstaat,
Fischer Verlag, Stuttgart.
Markl H. (1985) Manipulation, modulation, informa-
tion, cognition: some ri ddles of communication,
in: Hölldobler B., Lindau er M. (Eds.), Experi-
mental behavioral ecology and sociobiology,
Fischer Verlag, Stuttgart, pp. 163–194.
Martin P. (1963) Die St euerung der Volksteilung
beim Schwärmen der Bienen. Zugleich ein
Beitrag zum Problem der Wanderschwärme,
Insectes Soc. 10, 13–42.
Nieh J.C. (1993) The stop signal of honey bees:
reconsidering its message, Behav. Ecol. Socio-
biol. 33, 51–56.
Nieh J.C. (1998) The honey bee shaking signal: func-
tion and design of a modulatory communication
signal, Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 42, 23–36.
Ohtani T., Kamada T. (1980) ‘Worker piping’: the
piping sounds produced by laying and guarding
worker honeybees, J. Apic. Res. 19, 154–163.
Pratt S.C., Kühnholz S., Seeley T.D., Weidenmuller
A. (1996) Worker piping associated with foraging
in undisturbed queenright colonies of honey bees,
Apidologie 27, 13–20.
Schmidt J.O. (1990) Swar m traps: an example of
research and technology transfer, Am. Bee J. 130,
333–334.
Schmidt J.O., Thoenes S.C. (1987) Swarm traps for
survey and control of Africanized honey bees,
Bull. Entomol. Soc. Am. 33, 155–158. 
Schmidt J.O., Thoenes S.C. (1990) Honey bee
(Hymenoptera: Apidae) preferences among artifi-
cial nest cavities, Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 83,
271–274.
Schneider S.S., Lewis L.A. (2004) The vibrational sig-
nal, modulatory communication and the organiza-
tion of labor in honey bees, Apis mellifera, Apid-
ologie 35, 117–131.
Schneider S.S., Stamps J.A ., Gary N.E. (1986) The
vibration dance of the honey bee. I. Communica-
tion regulating foraging on two time scales,
Anim. Behav. 34, 377–385.
Schneider S.S., Visscher P.K., Camazine S. (1998)
Vibration signal behavior of waggle-dancers in
swarms of the honey bee, Apis mellifera
(Hymenoptera: Apidae), Ethology 104, 963–972.
Seeley T.D. (1977) Measurement of nest cavity
volume by the honeybee (Apis mellifera), Behav.
Ecol. Sociobiol. 2, 201–227.
Seeley T.D. (1985) Honeybee ecology, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Seeley T.D. (1994) Honey bee foragers as sensory
units of their colonies, Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol.
34, 51–62.
Seeley T.D. (1995) The wisdom of the hive, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Seeley T.D. (2003) Consen sus building during nest-
site selection in honey bee swarms: the expiration

===== PAGE 16 =====
116 T.D. Seeley, P.K. Visscher
of dissent, Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 53, 417–
424.
Seeley T.D., Buhrman S.C. (1999) Group decision
making in swarms of h oney bees, Behav. Ecol.
Sociobiol. 45, 19–31.
Seeley T.D., Buhrman S.C. (2001) Nest-site selection
in honey bees: how well do swarms implement
the ‘best-of-N’ decisi on rule? Behav. Ecol.
Sociobiol. 49, 416–427.
Seeley T.D., Tautz J. (2001) Worker piping in honey
bee swarms and its role in preparing for Liftoff, J.
Comp. Physiol. A 187, 667–676.
Seeley T.D., Visscher P.K. (2003) Choosing a home:
how the scouts in a honey bee swarm perceive the
completion of their group decision making,
Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 54, 511–520.
Seeley T.D., Morse R.A., Visscher P.K. (1979) The
natural history of the flight of honey bee Swarms,
Psyche 86, 103–113.
Seeley T.D., Weidenmüller A., Kühnholz S. (1998)
The shaking signal of the honey bee informs
workers to prepare for greater activity, Ethology
104, 10–26.
Seeley T.D., Kleinhenz M., Bujok B., Tautz J. (2003)
Thorough warm-up before take-off in honey bee
swarms, Naturwissenschaften 90, 256–260.
Sober E., Wilson D.S. ( 1998) Unto others, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Visscher P.K. (2003) How se lf-organization evolves,
Nature 421, 799–800.
Visscher P.K., Camazine S. (1999) Collective
decisions and cognition in bees, Nature 397,
400.
Visscher P.K., Shepardson J., Camazine S. (1999)
Vibration signal modulates the behavior of
house-hunting honey bees ( Apis mellifera ),
Ethology 105, 759–769.
Wilson E.O. (1971) The insect societies, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Winsor C.P. (1934) Mathematical analysis of growth
of mixed populations, Cold Spring Harbor Symp.
Quant. Biol. 2, 181–187.
Witherell P.C. (1985) A review of the scientific
literature relating to honey bee bait hives
and swarm attractants, Am. Bee J. 125, 823–
829.
To access this journal online:
www.edpsciences.org