

===== PAGE 1 =====
Behav Ecol Sociobiol (1991) 28:277-290 Behavioral Ecology 
and Sociobiology 
© Springer-Verlag 1991 
Collective decision-making in honey bees: 
how colonles choose among nectar sources 
Thomas D. Seeley 1, Scott Camazine 1, and James Sneyd 2. 
t Section of Neurobiology and Behavior, Mudd Hall, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA 
2 Centre for Mathematical Biology, Mathematical Institute, 24-29 St. Giles', Oxford OX1 3LB, UK 
Received April 3, 1990 / Accepted September 30, 1990 
Summary. A honey bee colony can skillfully choose 
among nectar sources. It will selectively exploit the most 
profitable source in an array and will rapidly shift its 
foraging efforts following changes in the array. How 
does this colony-level ability emerge from the behavior 
of individual bees ? The answer lies in understanding how 
bees modulate their colony's rates of recruitment and 
abandonment for nectar sources in accordance with the 
profitability of each source. A forager modulates its be- 
havior in relation to nectar source profitability: as prof- 
itability increases, the tempo of foraging increases, the 
intensity of dancing increases, and the probability of 
abandoning the source decreases. How does a forager 
assess the profitability of its nectar source? Bees ac- 
complish this without making comparisons among nec- 
tar sources. Neither do the foragers compare different 
nectar sources to determine the relative profitability of 
any one source, nor do the food storers compare differ- 
ent nectar loads and indicate the relative profitability 
of each load to the foragers. Instead, each forager knows 
only about its particular nectar source and independent- 
ly calculates the absolute profitability of its source. Even 
though each of a colony's foragers operates with ex- 
tremely limited information about the colony's food 
sources, together they will generate a coherent colony- 
level response to different food sources in which better 
ones are heavily exploited and poorer ones are aban- 
doned. This is shown by a computer simulation of nec- 
tar-source selection by a colony in which foragers behave 
as described above. Nectar-source selection by honey 
bee colonies is a process of natural selection among alter- 
native nectar sources as foragers from more profitable 
sources "survive" (continue visiting their source) longer 
and °' reproduce" (recruit other foragers) better than do 
foragers from less profitable sources. Hence this colonial 
decision-making is based on decentralized control. We 
* Present address." Department of Biomathematics, UCLA School 
of Medicine, 10833 La Conte Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90024, 
USA 
Offprint requests to : T.D. Seeley 
suggest that honey bee colonies possess decentralized 
decisi0n-making because it combines effectiveness with 
simplicity of communication and computation within a 
colony. 
Introduction 
Recently, numerous authors have noted that colonies 
of advanced social insects constitute higher-order cogni- 
tive entities, that is, supraorganismal systems capable 
of evaluating situations and producing adaptive solu- 
tions to problems (Hofstadter 1979; Markl 1985; Seeley 
and Levien 1987; Wilson and H611dobler 1988; Franks 
1989). Examples of this colony-level problem-solving in- 
clude a swarm of honey bees selecting the best nest site 
from a dozen or more possibilities (Lindauer 1955; See- 
ley 1982), a colony of honeypot ants assessing the 
strength of a neighboring colony and deciding accord- 
ingly whether or not to attack (H611dobler 1981 ; Lums- 
den and H611dobler 1983), and a colony of army ants 
choosing a bearing for each day's swarm raid so as to 
avoid the previous day's foraging zone (Franks and 
Fletcher 1983; Deneubourg et al. 1989). All such ensem- 
ble cognitive performances present us with the puzzle 
of how the problem-solving abilities of a colony arise 
from the actions and interactions of the insects compos- 
ing the colony. 
We address this mystery in the context of honey bee 
colonies choosing among patches of flowers, selectively 
exploiting the most profitable ones. The ecology of this 
decision-making can be summarized as follows (reviewed 
in Seeley 1985). Each year a colony of bees consumes 
considerable food, approximately 20 kg of pollen and 
60 kg of honey. The thousands of foragers in a colony 
laboriously gather this food from the flower patches dot- 
ting the countryside around the colony's hive. Typically 
a colony will know each day about a dozen or more 
potential food sources, each with its own level of profit- 


===== PAGE 2 =====
278 
ability, determined by such variables as the distance 
from the hive and the abundance and quality of the 
food. To gather its food efficiently, a colony must deploy 
its foragers among the flower patches in accordance with 
their profitabilities. 
We begin by documenting the skill with which a col- 
ony chooses among nectar sources so that most of its 
nectar comes always from the richest sources. Then we 
show how this selective exploitation arises through pre- 
cise modulation of the rates of recruitment and abandon- 
ment for different nectar sources in relation to their pro- 
fitabilities. This points out the crucial question: how 
are the rates of these two processes adaptively regulated ? 
After describing the multidimensional modulation of 
foraging behavior in relation to nectar source profitabili- 
ty, we experimentally analyze how each forager assesses 
nectar source profitability. The two principal competing 
hypotheses are that each forager judges by itself the pro- 
fitability of its nectar source, or that each forager is 
given this information by the food storer bees in the 
hive. Next we check our understanding of how the joint 
actions of a colony's foragers result in producing colony- 
level decision-making by formulating a mathematical 
model of this process and comparing the decision-mak- 
ing patterns of simulated and real colonies. We end by 
discussing the general implications of our investigation. 
Methods 
1. Colony-level analysis: selective exploitation of nectar 
sources 
A colony composed of individually identifiable bees was presented 
with two nectar sources with different profitabilities. The colony's 
differential exploitation of the two sources was measured by deter- 
mining the total number of different individuals visiting each food 
source. Also, the different rates of recruitment and abandonment 
for the two feeders, which ultimately generated the exploitation 
difference between the two food sources, were determined from 
records of each bee's visits to the feeders. 
Study site. All observations were made at the Cranberry Lake Bio- 
logical Station (44009 ' N, 74°48 ' W) in northern New York State. 
This site is surrounded by forests, bogs, and lakes for more than 
20 km in all directions, hence forage for bees is extremely sparse 
and no native honey bees survive there. A full-size colony, kept 
on platform scales, lost weight (0.50_+0.30 kg) on 15 days and 
gained weight (0.15 kg) on just 1 day during the 16-day study 
period in June 1989. The scarcity of food enabled us to control 
the forage collected by our study colony even though its foragers 
flew freely from the hive. 
Study colony. We assembled a colony of individually identifiable 
bees over a 2-day period, 1-2 June 1989, in Ithaca, as follows. 
First, at the beginning of each day, approximately 2500 worker 
bees from a colony of Italian honey bees (Apis mellifera ligustica) 
were shaken into a wire cage. From this, we periodically shook 
groups of approximately 50 bees into plastic bags and placed them 
in a refrigerator to immobilize them. After at least 15 min of cool- 
ing, the bees in a bag were removed from the refrigerator and 
poured onto a container of "blue ice", where they stayed chilled 
during the labelling operation. A bee tag (Opalithpl/ittchen; with 
500 number and color combinations) was glued on the thorax of 
each bee, and a dot of one of eight different colors of paint was 
applied to its abdomen. Finally, the bees were gently poured into 
a cage containing a sugar water feeder and the mother queen. 
This procedure was repeated several times a day for 2 days until 
4000 bees were labelled. 
At the end of the second day, the labelled workers and their 
queen were transferred to a two-frame observation hive identical 
to the one described in Seeley (1989). The bottom frame contained 
a mixture of brood (eggs and larvae), honey, and pollen, and the 
top frame was empty except for a few cells of pollen. On 4 June 
the colony was moved to Cranberry Lake and left undisturbed 
for 4 more days, though bees were trained to the feeders to set 
up the experimental array and to provide food for the colony. 
On the evening of 8 June, the colony's population was censused 
by counting the number of bees inside 10 randomly selected 2.5 x 
2.5 cm grid squares on each side of the observation hive: the colony 
contained approximately 3450 bees. Rainy weather prevailed for 
the next 10 days, during which all we could do was provide food 
at the feeders whenever the bees could fly. This kept the colony 
fed and ensured that the dozen or so bees trained to each feeder 
would continue visiting the feeders. By the time the weather cleared 
(19 June) the colony had grown noticeably; fortunately the foragers 
were still all labelled bees. A census on the evening of 19 June 
indicated a population of approximately 4200 bees. 
Feeders and experimental layout. The feeders were pneumatic feed- 
ing dishes identical to those described in a previous paper (Seeley 
1989). The observation hive and the two feeders were placed in 
an approximately linear arrangement, with the hive in the center 
and the feeders 400 m to the north and south, in sinai1 clearings. 
Both food sources contained the scent anise in a vented reservoir 
beneath the feeder and also in the sucrose solution (60 gl of anise 
extract per liter). 
Measuring forager group size, and recruitment and abandonment 
rates. We recorded which bees visited each food source during 
every half-hour period throughout two 8-h sets of observations. 
We accomplished this using roll call sheets listing the identification 
codes of all 4000 bees and crossing off the identification codes 
of all bees seen at a feeder during each half hour. Each sheet 
therefore showed which individuals visited a particular feeder at 
least once during a 30-rain period, and how many in total did 
so. This number we call the "forager group size." Comparisons 
between roll call sheets for a feeder also revealed when (to the 
nearest 30 rain) individuals were first sighted at (i.e., were recently 
recruited to) the feeder or were last sighted at (i.e., were soon 
to abandon) the feeder. From these data we calculated the per 
capita recruitment rate or abandonment rate for each feeder for 
each half hour by dividing the number of recruits or deserters 
counted during that half hour by the forager group size for the 
previous half hour. 
2. Individual-level analysis: behavior modulation 
in relation to nectar source profitability 
Two colonies were established in adjacent observation hives and 
30 bees from each colony were trained to visit separate feeders 
at the same distance from the hives. The profitability of one (the 
experinaental) colony's feeder was systematical(y changed during 
the day and the behavioral adjustments of its foragers were re- 
corded. MeanwNle, the profitability of the other (the control) col- 
ony's feeder was left unchanged and the behaviors of its foragers 
were recorded as a check for possible confounding changes in the 
ambient conditions. 
Study site, bees, experimental layout, and feeders. This experiment 
was conducted in July 1987 in connection with other experiments 
already published (Seeley 1989). It involved the same study site, 
the same two colonies in observation hives, the same experimental 
layout, and the same feeders as were described in the prior report. 


===== PAGE 3 =====
279 
The only difference between the present experiment and the one 
reported in Fig. 2 of Seeley 1989 was that, in the present case, 
the fullness of the experimental colony's honey combs was kept 
constant and the profitability of it's feeder was varied, whereas, 
before, the fullness of the experimental colony's honey combs was 
varied and the profitability of it's feeder was kept constant. 
Measuring recruitment and recording the behaviors of foragers. Re- 
cruitment from each colony was measured by training 30 bees 
to a feeder using standard techniques (von Frisch 1967), labeling 
these bees (the recruiters) with individually identifiable paint 
marks, and counting the number of unlabeled bees (the recruits) 
appearing at the feeder every 15 rain. Each recruit was captured 
in a plastic bag (to minimize release of alarm pheromone) shortly 
after its arrival at the feeder, and was frozen at the end of the 
day. 
Roll calls of the labeled bees at 30-min intervals indicated the 
number of recruiters at each feeder; this number dropped below 
30 for the experimental colony when the profitability of its feeder 
was lowered and some bees abandoned it. The probability of visit- 
ing the feeder was calculated by dividing the number of labeled 
bees visiting the feeder by 30, that is, the number of labeled bees 
that visited the feeder when all did so. 
Measurements were also made of several variables of the in- 
hive behavior of the labelled bees from the experimental colony. 
This involved following one (randomly selected) labelled bee at 
a time from when it entered the hive to when it exited it. One 
variable was the "time to start of unloading," which is the time 
interval between entering the hive and beginning to transfer nectar 
to a food storer bee. The "time to end of unloading" is the time 
interval between entering the hive and completing the transfer of 
nectar to food storers. The "time in hive after unloading" is the 
time interval between finishing unloading nectar and leaving the 
hive. Another variable was "dance circuits per bee per return to 
the hive," which was measured by counting the dance circuits each 
bee performed during its time inside the hive. The "probability 
of dancing" was calculated by dividing the number of bees that 
danced by the total number of bees that were followed (i.e., sample 
size). Finall¢, the "foraging tempo," measured in units of trips 
to the feeder per bee per 30 min, was calculated by first dividing 
the number of labelled bees visiting the feeder by the number of 
labelled bees entering the hive per rain (measured with ten l-rain 
counts of labelled bees coming in the entrance). This quotient indi- 
cates the average time per roundtrip to the feeder. Next, 30 min 
was divided by the roundtrip time to determine the number of 
trips to the feeder that each bee was making in 30 rain. 
Statistical test. A single classification ANOVA (Sokal and Rohlf 
1981) was performed for each variable for which there was an 
estimate of the mean and variance, i.e., all variables except for 
the probability of visiting the feeder, the probability of dancing, 
and foraging tempo. 
3. Individual-level analysis: assessing nectar source 
profitability 
Two feeders were established, one with a relatively dilute sugar 
solution but located near the hive, and the other with a more 
concentrated sugar solution but positioned far from the hive. Bees 
were trained to forage from each feeder, and their behaviors inside 
the hive, especially the strength of their recruitment dances, were 
monitored to determine which feeder was judged more profitable. 
The answer reveals whether it is the food storers or the foragers 
that assess nectar source profitability. 
Study site, bees, experimental layout, and feeders. This experiment 
was performed in Ithaca, New York, using a small colony of Italian 
honey bees in a two-frame observation hive housed inside a labora- 
tory building. The hive and feeders were identical to those described 
in a previous study (Seeley 1989). Both feeders were positioned 
along a rarely used road (one 50 m and the other 1250 m from 
the hive) that traverses flat, treeless agricultural fields; hence, both 
feeders had virtually identical exposure to wind and sun. Fifteen 
bees were trained to each feeder using standard techniques (von 
Frisch 1967). Each bee was labeled with paint marks coding indi- 
vidual identity and which feeder she was visiting. Recruits to each 
feeder were captured in plastic bags to prevent forager build-up 
at the feeders. 
Recording the behaviors of foragers. Labelled foragers were fol- 
lowed one at a time inside the observation hive from time of arrival 
to departure. Measurements were made, as previously described, 
of the time to start of unloading, the dance circuits per bee per 
return to the hive, and the probability of dancing. 
Statistical tests. We used t-tests, either Student's or the test for 
equality of two proportions using arcsine transformations (Sokal 
and Rohlf 1981). 
Results 
1. Colony-level analysis 
Pattern: selective exploitation of nectar sources. Figure 1 
shows that when a colony was given a series of choices 
between two feeders with different profitabilities, it con- 
sistently focused its collection efforts on the m o r e  profit- 
able feeder. The net result was that the colony steadily 
tracked the richest source of nectar in the changing ar- 
ray. Note that the measure of foraging effort shown 
in Fig. 1 - the total number of different individuals visit- 
ing the feeder in a half hour - underestimates the col- 
ony's response differential to the two feeders. This is 
because the poorer feeder (0.75 mol/1), relative to the 
richer feeder (2.50 tool/l), was not only visited by fewer 
bees, but also was visited at a lower rate by each bee 
(see data on foraging tempo in Table 1). 
Process: tuning the rates of recruitment and abandon- 
ment. Because the size of a group is determined by the 
history of additions to and subtractions from the group, 
it was clear a priori that the changes in forager group 
size shown in Fig. 1 reflect changes in the rates of recruit- 
ment (additions) and abandonment (subtractions) for 
each feeder. The complete picture of the r e c r u i t m e n t  a n d  
abandonment dynamics for the two feeders is shown 
in Fig. 2. On the morning of 19 June, there was essential- 
ly no recruitment to or abandonment of the north feeder 
(1.00 mol/1), and the forager group size here rose only 
to 12 bees, namely the ones that had foraged here the 
previous day. At the south feeder (2.50 mol/1), however, 
there was strong recruitment, especially early in the 
morning when the feeder was still lightly exploited, and 
little abandonment, so the forager group size increased 
dramatically, rising from 0 to 91 bees in 4 hours. Then 
in the afternoon, the south feeder (now 0.75 tool/l) re- 
ceived negligible recruitment but intense abandonment, 
so that its forager group size fell back to just 10 bees 
by the end of the afternoon. Meanwhile, the north feeder 
(now 2.50 tool/l) had become the target of strong recruit- 
ment but little abandonment, with the net result that 


===== PAGE 4 =====
280 
LU 
Z 
-~ 
8 AM 
1.00 M 
Noon 
North Feeder Hive 
• 
T 
(9 
South Feeder 
T 
® 
...: ::... 
T 
® 
2.50 M ••:o ..'. . . . .  : : . .  
o • oOo• eO o• o o~°• ° 
• oOo°•• • • eeee• ooe @ • ~ oeOOo • • • eoe • • • ooeo • o oO• ° °oooooe 000 00 eel looooe • •0••o • oo•eeo 
• o~ • TO•O • 
l 
4 PM 
2.50 M 
® 
::::: 
G T 
® 
0.75 M 
unexpectedly large forager group size - as many as 32 
bees - for the poorer (south, 0.75 mol/1) feeder on the 
morning of 20 June. This morning surge in foragers to 
the poorer feeder arose because bees that had foraged 
here the previous morning came out to reconnoitre the 
site of their prior success, not because bees were recruit- 
ing nestmates to the 0.75 re•l/1 solution at this feeder. 
Virtually all of the bees (46 out of 48) that visited the 
south feeder on the morning of 20 June had foraged 
there the previous morning. Also many (18 out of 48) 
of these bees ceased visiting the feeder within an hour 
of their first visit, so that the bees were actually abandon- 
ing this feeder at a rather high rate from 9:30 a.m. to 
12 noon (see Fig. 2). 
These results indicate that colonies are highly skilled 
at adjusting the rates of recruitment and abandonment 
for each nectar source in relation to its profitability, 
and that it is the precise modulation of these rates which 
generates a colony's selective exploitation of superior 
nectar sources. This raises the next question: what do 
individual bees do to produce this adaptive tuning of 
their colony's rates of recruitment and abandonment? 
8 AM 
• • 
T f~ T 
(9 (9 
2.50 M 
... 
LU 
z T (3 T 
~ Noon .-~ 
® ® 
0.75 M 
0.75 M 2.50 M 
y t3 Y 4 PM 
® 
Fig. 1. The basic decision-making phenomenon. When given a 
choice between two food sources with different profitabilities, the 
colony consistently directed most of its foraging effort onto the 
richer one. The number of dots above each feeder denotes the 
forager group size for that feeder, i.e., the number of different 
bees that visited the feeder in the half hour preceding the time 
shown on the left. For several days prior to the start of observa- 
tions, a small group of bees was trained to each feeder (12 and 
15 bees for the north and south feeders, respectively), thus on 
the morning of 19 June, the two feeders had essentially equivalent 
histories of low-level exploitation. The feeders were located 400 m 
from the hive and were identical except for the concentration of 
the sugar solution 
the forager group size here rose from 12 to 121 bees. 
Similar patterns of reciprocal recruitment and abandon- 
ment, in accordance with food source profitability, were 
recorded on the second day as well. One difference be- 
tween the data for 19 and 20 June, however, was an 
2. Individual-level analysis 
Pattern: behavior modulation in relation to nectar source 
profitability. The data presented in Table 1 illustrate the 
ability of bees to finely adjust several components of 
their foraging behavior in accordance with nectar source 
quality. On the one hand, when the quality was high 
(as when the feeder was loaded with the 2.0 re•l/1 sucrose 
solution), the bees continued visiting the food source, 
worked quickly, and danced vigorously, thereby bring- 
ing additional nestmates to help exploit their rich find. 
On the other hand, when the nectar source quality was 
low (0.5 mol/1 solution, or less), the bees tended to aban- 
don the source or, if they did continue foraging there, 
they behaved relatively slowly and did not perform re- 
cruitment dances. This set of responses resulted in a 
drop in the number of bees at the feeder. Setting the 
feeder at intermediate levels of quality elicited behavioral 
responses of intermediate strength, with correspondingly 
intermediate rates of recruitment to or abandonment of 
the feeder. Note that simultaneous measurements of re- 
cruitment rate for a control colony showed no significant 
changes, which implies that the ambient conditions were 
stable during the observations and, therefore, that the 
behavioral changes documented in Table 1 were solely 
in response to changes in food source profitability. 
Process: assessing nectar source profitability. How does 
a forager assess the profitability of its nectar source? 
Three hypotheses come to mind. First, each forager 
might acquire this information by making direct com- 
parisons of nectar sources. This would require that a 
forager visit several nectar sources to judge the relative 
value of the source from which it is foraging. Second, 
each forager might rely instead upon indirect compari- 
sons made by the food storer bees inside the hive. Each 


===== PAGE 5 =====
NORTH FEEDER 1 
sucrose sol'n: 
(rnol / L) 
~- 
& 100 
-N 
~. 
o~ 50 
o 
Ia_ 
E 0.5 ~ 
.13 
,.5 
~i N 1.0 
~' 0.5 
1.00 
I SOUTH FEEDER I 
sucrose sol'n: 
(rnol / L) 
-- 
,-~ 
~ 100 
-~ 
# 
o 
B~ 5O 
$ 
o IJ. 
1.0 
E 0.5 ..g~ 
~'~21 ~ O~.~3 
~ 
~.13~ 
E~ ~ .~ 1.5 
0.5 
2.50 0.75 
v 
10 12 2 
2.50 0.75 
[m~ 
4 8 10 12 
I I 
2 4 
m 
8 10 
2.50 
I I I 
m m 
I__ I .,_1 
12 
19 June 
I I__J 1__/, 
2 4 8 
TIME OF DAY 
10 12 
20 June 
2 4 
281 
Fig. 2. The colony's responses to 
the two nectar sources in detail. 
Values of forager group size 
denote the number of different 
individuals that visited each 
feeder during the previous half 
hour. Per capita rates of 
recruitment or abandonment 
represent the number of recruits 
or deserters recorded for a 30- 
min interval divided by the 
forager group size for the start of 
the interval. At the start of the 
observations, 12 and 15 bees had 
experience at the north and south 
feeders, respectively, and so 
provided an initial link between 
the colony and each feeder. These 
bees returned to their respective 
feeders on the morning of 19 
June, but were not counted as 
recruits. Likewise, any bee that 
had visited a feeder during the 
afternoon of 19 June was not 
counted as a recruit if it appeared 
at the same feeder on the 
morning of 20 June, hence the 
increase in forager group size at 
the two feeders without strong 
recruitment on the morning of 20 
June. This figure illustrates the 
precise regulation of a colony's 
recruitment and abandonment 
rates in relation to nectar source 
profitability, with the result that 
the colony's foraging efforts 
tracked the richer nectar source 
food storer bee unloads foragers from various nectar 
sources, and ithas been suggested (Boch 1956; Lindauer 
1961, 1975) that food storers compare the nectar loads 
they receive and preferentially unload foragers bearing 
the most profitable nectar. A forager's ease in getting 
unloaded would, according to this hypothesis, inform 
it of the relative quality of its nectar source. A third 
possibility is that no comparisons are made, neither by 
foragers nor by food storers; instead, each forager 
knows only about its particular nectar source, and its 
nervous system can calculate the absolute quality of its 
source. This hypothesis is closely analogous to Lin- 
dauer's (1955) idea that a scout bee, without previous 
experience in house-hunting, can assess the quality of 
a nest site through reference to an "angeborenes Schema 
eines Nistplatzes." [Note that in the case of foraging, 
food source quality is not the sole factor influencing 
a bee's behavior. Other factors, such as the colony's 
need for food and the seasonal availability of forage, 
determine the levels of food source quality that are the 


===== PAGE 6 =====
282 
Table 1. Information on the protocol, ambient conditions, and results of the experiment documenting the modulation of foraging behavior 
in relation to nectar source profitability 
Time period (hours) 0915-1045 1100-1230 1 2 4 5 - 1 4 1 5  1 4 3 0 - 1 6 0 0  Significance 
Experimental colony 
Sucrose solution (tool/l) 2.00 1.50 1.00 0.50 
Probability of visiting feeder 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.60 
Foraging tempo (trips/bee/30 min) 6.1 6.2 6.0 3.9 
Probability of dancing 0.80 0.59 0.26 0.00 
Dance circuits/bee/return to hive 9.8 _+ 15.4 5.4_+ 4.9 1.6 _+ 3.9 0.0 
Recruitment to feeder (bees/15 min) 10.3 _+ 5.4 5.6 _+ 4.0 2.2 _+ 1.6 0.0 
Time to start of unloading (s) 13 _+ 7 12 + 6 14 _+ 7 28 _+ 30 
Time to end of unloading (s) 68 _+ 39 50 _+ 16 46 _+ 11 64_+ 24 
Time in hive after unloading (s) 23 _+ 18 20 _+ 20 22 _+ 15 51 _+ 32 
Sample size (bees followed) 25 30 34 25 
Control colony 
Sucrose solution (mol/1) 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50 
Recruitment to feeder (bees/15 min) 8.0 _+ 1.5 7.5 + 3.6 7.7_ 3.6 7.3 _+ 1.9 
Ambient conditions 
Temperature (°C) 25.0-28.0 28.0-29.0 27.5-28.5 27.5-28.0 
<0.001 
<0.001 
<0.01 
<0.05 
< 0.01 
>0.75 
thresholds for such behaviors as returning to and danc- 
ing for a food source (Lindauer 1948; Seeley 1986, 1989). 
Hence a given level of nectar source quality will elicit 
different behavioral responses under different condi- 
tions.] 
Which of these three possible mechanisms operates 
in the bee hive? The first proposed mechanism (HI: 
direct comparisons hypothesis) is rendered highly im- 
probable by the following observations from the begin- 
ning of the experiment depicted in Figs. 1 and 2. On 
the morning of 19 June, the bees from the south feeder 
recruited strongly to their feeder with its 2.50 mol/1 su- 
crose solution while the bees from the north feeder 
scarcely recruited at all to their feeder with its 1.00 mol/1 
solution. Clearly, the foragers working these two feeders 
had correctly assessed the profitability of each food 
source. But did the assessment process depend upon bees 
making direct comparisons of these two food sources? 
Evidently not. The records of which individuals visited 
which feeder reveal that of the 117 bees total that visited 
the two feeders during the morning of 19 June, only 
two of them visited both feeders. These two bees both 
switched from the poorer feeder (north) to the richer 
feeder (south) late in the morning (see Fig. 2). Hence 
only a tiny minority of the foragers had knowledge of 
both feeders; the vast majority must have arrived at 
an assessment of the profitability of these feeders with- 
out making direct comparisons between them. (It should 
be noted that the two feeders were essentially the only 
two nectar sources available to the bees in the study 
colony. One indication of this is that on 19 June the 
scale hive colony lost 0.50 kg, which is virtually the same 
weight loss recorded for the previous 3 days (0.45, 0.55, 
0.60 kg) when the weather was cold and rainy and the 
bees could not even fly from the hive.) 
To distinguish between the second hypothesis (H2: 
indirect comparisons mediated by food storer bees) and 
third hypothesis (H3: no comparisons), we compared 
the responses of foragers to two feeders that were ar- 
ranged so that the two hypotheses gave opposite predic- 
tions about which feeder the bees would judge more 
profitable. To understand the design of this experimental 
layout, we must focus on a critical feature of H2, namely 
its implication that a nectar source's profitability is eval- 
uated simply as a function of the sugar concentration 
of its nectar. This follows from the basic premise of 
H2 that it is the food storer bees that make the evalua- 
tions, coupled with the reasonable assumption that the 
only variable affecting a nectar source's profitability that 
food storer bees might know about is the sugar concen- 
tration of its nectar. We feel that this assumption is valid 
because whereas it is clear that food storer bees can 
easily acquire information about the sugar concentration 
of a source's nectar, simply by tasting the nectar as they 
receive it from a forager, there is no evidence that food 
storer bees acquire information about the other variables 
influencing the energetic profitability of a nectar source 
- including distance from hive to source, abundance of 
nectar at the source, difficulty of feeding at the source, 
direction in relation to the wind, and wind speed. For 
example, although a food storer bee could conceivably 
acquire information about the distance between the hive 
and a forager's nectar source (by following dances per- 
formed by the forager), it is clear that this happens rare- 
ly, if at all. Food storer bees almost never attempt to 
follow dances performed by foragers they have unloaded 
(e.g., see Fig. 6 in Seeley 1989). Moreover, a forager 
rarely even provides the food storer that has unloaded 
it with any dances to follow; 58 different foragers gather- 
ing nectar and pollen from natural flower patches were 
observed making a total of 153 returns to the hive with 
forage, and in only 11 (7%) of these returns were dances 
performed (data from bees followed in the study Seeley 
and Visscher (1988)). Likewise, there are no signs that 


===== PAGE 7 =====
50 m 1250 rn 
0.75 mol/L 1.00 or 2.50 mol/L 
Variable 
T 
I I I 
Time to start of 11 + 4 a 37 + 26 b 12 + 4 a 
unloading (s) 
Probability of 0.50 a 0.10 b 0.73 a 
dancing 
Dance circuits per 4.5+6.3 a 0.6 +0.3 b 14.6 + 19.6 c 
bee per return to 
hive 
Sample size 22 20 
(bees followed) 
22 
Fig. 3. Experimental design and results of the test for how foragers 
assess the profitability of a nectar source. Fifteen bees were trained 
to forage at each of the two feeders, and their responses to these 
feeders were observed. The bees from the 50-m, 0.75-mol/1 feeder 
unloaded their nectar more quickly and danced more strongly than 
did those from the 1250-m, ~.00-mol/1 feeder. This implies that 
assessments of nectar source profitability are made by the forager 
bees, which have knowledge of the many variables affecting the 
energetic profitability of a nectar source, rather than by the food 
storer bees, which know only one variable, the sugar concentration 
of the nectar 
283 
strongly than did the bees from the 1250-m, 1.00-tool/1 
feeder. These results strongly contradict H2. 
This rejection of H2 is reinforced by the average 
times to start unloading for the different forager groups. 
First, note that the bees from the 1250-m, 1.00-mol/1 
feeder took more time to begin unloading than did the 
bees from the 50-m, 0.75-mol/1 feeder. This runs con- 
trary to H2, which assumes that food storer bees prefer- 
entially unload foragers bringing in more concentrated 
nectar. Second, note that foragers from the 50-m, 0.75- 
tool/1 feeder and the 1250-m feeder, when reloaded with 
a 2.50-moi/1 solution, began unloading equally quickly, 
despite the huge difference in concentration between 
their sugar solutions. This too contradicts the basic as- 
sumption of H2. However, both of these patterns in un- 
loading times are consistent with H3. The first pattern 
evidently is the result of the foragers from the 1250-m, 
1.00-tool/1 feeder concluding that their feeder's profit- 
ability was low and slowing their foraging tempo (see 
Table 1), in part by not seeking to unload their nectar 
immediately upon entering the hive. The second pattern 
apparently reflects the bees from both the 50-m, 0.75- 
tool/1 feeder and the 1250-m, 2.50-mol/1 feeder judging 
that their feeder was high in profitability and deciding 
to forage with high tempo, which included seeking to 
unload nectar immediately upon entering the hive. 
food storer bees acquire information about the other 
variables influencing the energetic profitability of a nec- 
tar source such as nectar abundance, direction in rela- 
tion to the wind, and wind speed since food storers 
remain inside the hive where they have no direct access 
to information about these variables, and they have no 
known means of gaining information about these vari- 
ables indirectly from the foragers. 
In contrast to H2, H3 implies that a nectar source's 
profitability is assessed as a function of many variables. 
This is because this hypothesis assumes that the foragers 
are making the assessments, and foragers of course have 
direct access to information about the multiple variables 
affecting the energetic profitability of a nectar source. 
The experimental layout shown in Fig. 3 is such that 
H2 and H3 give opposite predictions about the relative 
profitabilities (as judged by the bees) of the two feeders, 
and hence about the bees' relative responses to these 
feeders. Consider what each hypothesis predicts about 
the bees' responses to the 50-m, 0.75-mol/1 feeder relative 
to those for the 1250-m, 1.00-tool/1 feeder. H2 predicts 
that the bees foraging from the 50-m, 0.75-mol/1 feeder 
will assess its profitability as relatively low because its 
sugar concentration is relatively low, and thus predicts 
that these bees will dance relatively little. H3, however, 
predicts that the bees visiting the 50-m, 0.75-mol/1 feeder 
will assess its profitability as relatively high because its 
much shorter distance from the hive will more than com- 
pensate for its lower sugar concentration, and therefore 
predicts that these bees should dance relatively strongly. 
Which prediction is correct? As we see in Fig. 3, the 
bees from the 50-m, 0.75-mol/1 feeder danced much more 
3. Model of collective decision-making 
We now formulate a mathematical model of nectar- 
source selection by honey bee colonies, based on the 
empirical work just presented. The model enables us to 
see more clearly the colony-level consequences of the 
individual-level behavior patterns described above. It 
therefore provides a test of the idea that the colony-level 
decision-making can be accounted for simply in terms 
of an assemblage of bees, in which each bee independent- 
ly modulates its behavior in accordance with the profit- 
ability of its nectar source. We check the validity of the 
ideas expressed in the model by comparing the pattern 
of exploitation of two unequal nectar sources that is 
predicted by this model with the pattern of exploitation 
that was actually observed. 
Biological basis of the model. We will start with a pool 
of foragers that are not yet committed to one of the 
nectar sources available outside the hive. Each of these 
uncommitted bees (hereafter called "follower bees ") lo- 
cates a nectar source by following the recruitment dances 
of a nestmate that is already committed to a patch of 
flowers. Now consider the behavior of one follower bee 
as it begins its day by following dances (Fig. 4). Within 
the dance floor region of the hive are bees dancing for 
two nectar sources (A and B). Our bee follows a dancer 
for nectar source A and is recruited to this source. Hav- 
ing located source A, it gathers a load of nectar and 
returns to the hive. After unloading its nectar to a food 
storer bee, the forager proceeds with one of three op- 
tions, illustrated by the arrows after the two branch 
points (diamonds). The first is (1) to abandon the nectar 


===== PAGE 8 =====
( 
284 
At hive unloading | 
nectar from A 
) (HA) 
P3 t Pl 
1- fx A 
fd A (1- fx A) ,~ 
(1-fd A) (1- fx A) 
P2 
fx B 
for B (DB) 
fl B 
I At hive unloading 1 
nectar from B 
(HB) 
L 
P5 P7 
~- 
1- fx ~3 
i:~' ~, ~, 
(1-fd B ) (f- fx g) 
i 1 
nectar source A nectar source B 
(A) (B) 
Fig. 4. Graphical representation of the mathematical model of how 
honey bee colonies choose between two nectar sources (A and B). 
The model is based on the following empirically determined cycle 
of foraging behavior. A bee begins foraging by following nestmates 
performing recruitment dances, then arrives at a food source and 
gathers a load of nectar, and finally returns to the hive and unloads 
the nectar. At this point it repeats the cycle, though now with 
the option of continuing to forage from its current nectar source 
(and perhaps even dancing for this source), rather than following 
dances to locate a new source. The black diamonds along the arrows 
denote decision points. The grey circle represents the dance floor 
area inside the hive. At any given moment, each forager is in one 
of the seven compartments shown (HA, HB, F, etc. denote both 
the respective compartments and the number of foragers in these 
compartments). The model predicts a distribution of the foragers 
among the seven compartments over time as a function of the 
rate constant (p~) associated with each compartment and the proba- 
bilities (f~A, fx B, etc.) associated with each of the five branch points. 
Empirical studies have revealed the behaviors of individual bees. 
A computer simulation of this model enables us to see the colony- 
level implications of these individual-level behavior patterns and 
thereby test our understanding of the way that these behavior pat- 
terns combine to produce a colony's ability to choose among nectar 
sources 
source and return to the pool of follower bees. If, how- 
ever, she elects to continue with her nectar source, then 
she has two other options, either (2) to perform recruit- 
ment dances before heading back to the flowers, or (3) 
to return to the flowers directly without attempting to 
recruit nestmates. Many variables of nectar sources - 
including nectar sweetness, nectar abundance, nectar ac- 
cessibility, and distance from the hive (Seeley 1986 and 
references therein) - influence foragers as they choose 
among these options. But in this model, as in the study 
of behavioral modulation above, we will work with nec- 
tar sources that differ only in their sugar concentration. 
Note too that this model does not consider changes in 
the response thresholds of the foragers in relation to 
changes in foraging conditions (Lindauer 1948; Seeley 
1986, 1989); hence, it represents the process of nectar- 
source selection under a fixed set of foraging conditions 
(weather, forage abundance, colony need, etc.). 
Mathematical structure of the model. The essential fea- 
tures of the biology just described can be incorporated 
in a mathematical model of a colony choosing between 
two nectar sources as follows. First, we assume that at 
any moment each forager must be in one of the seven 
compartments shown in Fig. 4. These compartments 
are: 
1. HA : unloading nectar from nectar source A 
2. HB: unloading nectar from nectar source B 
3. DA: dancing for nectar source A 
4. DB: dancing for nectar source B 
5. A : foraging at nectar source A 
6. B: foraging at nectar source B 
7. F: following a dancer 
More formally, a bee is considered in one of these seven 
compartments until the moment she enters her next com- 
partment. Thus, for example, the time spent in DA in- 
cludes both the time spent dancing for anc't the time 
needed to return to nectar source A. Note that the dance 
floor (shaded area in Fig. 4) holds three compartments, 
one (DA) containing bees dancing for source A, one (DB) 
containing bees dancing for source B, and one (F) hold- 
ing bees following a dancer. Note too that Fig. 4 consists 
of two separate cycles, one for each food source, with 
the follower compartment (F) the only intersection point 
for the two cycles. Thus bees from one nectar source 
can switch over to the other source only by passing 
through the dance floor and following a dancer for the 
other nectar source. Figure 4 suggests that the dance 
floor lies at the heart of the decision-making process. 
Whatever information transfer occurs among the for- 
agers is assumed to happen here. 
Two variables affect the proportion of the total for- 
ager force that is in each of the seven compartments: 
(1) the rate at which individual foragers move from one 
compartment to another and (2) the probability that 
a forager takes one or the other fork at the five branch 
points (diamonds) in Fig. 4). The fraction of bees leaving 
a compartment in a given time interval~ is denoted by 
the appropriate rate constant Pi. For example, the rate 
constant for bees leaving compartment A is P3 and the 
fraction of the bees at nectar source A that leave in 
a time interval At is equal to p3At. The values of the 
rate constants pi will be calculated from experimental 
data in the next section. 
Now let us consider what determines the probabilities 
of the different behaviors at each of the five branch 
points in Fig. 4. The first branch point occurs after a 
bee has unloaded her nectar in the hive. At this point 


===== PAGE 9 =====
Table 2. Parameter values for the model of a colony choosing between two nectar sources, 
to the 2.50-mol/1 and the 0.75-mol/1 feeders, respectively. For full definitions of the parameters, 
285 
as shown in Fig. 1. A and B correspond 
see the text and Fig. 4 
Parameter: definition Value Reference 
T1 : time from start of unloading to start of following, dancing, or foraging, A foragers 1.0 min 
T2 : time from start of dancing to start of foraging, A foragers 1.5 rain 
T~ : time from start of foraging to start of unloading, A foragers 2.5 min 
T~ : time from start of following dancers to start of foraging, A and B foragers 60 rain 
Ts : time from start of unloading to start of following, dancing, or foraging, B foragers 3.0 min 
T6 : time from start of dancing to start of foraging, B foragers 2.0 rain 
T~ : time from start of foraging to start of unloading, B foragers 3.5 min 
f~ : probability of abandoning A, per foraging trip 0.00 
f~: probability of abandoning B, per foraging trip 0.04 
fd A : probability of dancing for A 1.00 
fe~: probability of dancing for B 0.I5 
Table 1" 
Table 1 
Table 1 
Seeley and Visscher 1988 b 
Table 1 ~ 
Table 1 
Table 1 
Table 1 
Table 1 ~ 
Table 1 
Table 1 
a Since the probability of dancing upon return from A is 1.00, T1 can be more precisely defined as the time from start of unloading 
to start of dancing. Conversely, since the probability of dancing upon return from B is near zero, Ts can be defined as essentially 
the time from start of unloading to start of following or foraging 
b This paper reports that in order to find a rich patch of flowers by following dances, on average a bee spends a total of 121 rain 
outside the hive searching for targets indicated by dances. The total time spent inside and outside the hive will be somewhat greater 
still. The value given here, 60 rain, is less than these estimates because in the Fig. 1 experiment the recruitment targets (feeders) were 
only 400 m from the hive, whereas in Seeley and Visscher (1988) the recruitment targets (natural flower patches) were on average 
1600 m from the hive 
c fx for the 0.75-mol/1 feeder was calculated as follows. Table I shows that a bee's probability of continuing to visit (=not abandoning) 
a 0.75-mol/1 feeder after 30 rain was approximately 0.80. Because each forager made approximately 5 trips to the feeder in 30 min, 
this implies that (I -p)S= 0.80, where p = the probability of abandoning the feeder per trip. Solving this equation yields p = 0.04 
she m a y  a b a n d o n  the nectar source and return to the 
dance floor to follow another dancer. The probability 
that a bee does so is denoted by the function fx, which 
we call the abandoning function. In general, the value 
offx will depend on the profitability of the nectar source; 
thus, fx A denotes the probability that a bee leaving HA 
will abandon nectar source A and become a follower 
bee (F). Abandonment diminishes the number of bees 
committed to a nectar source and provides a pool of 
uncommitted bees that follow dancers for one nectar 
source or the other. 
The second branch point applies to bees that did 
not abandon their nectar source. It determines what pro- 
portion of these bees will dance for their nectar source. 
Although at this branch point there is no filtering of 
bees away from nectar sources, the outcome of this 
branch point affects the probability of a follower bee 
following dances for each nectar source, as described 
hereafter. The probability that a bee becomes a dancer 
for her nectar source is denoted by the function re. The 
function fd is called the dancing function and, as with 
the abandoning function, its value for a given bee de- 
pends on the profitability of the bee's nectar source, 
with feA denoting the probability of dancing by a bee 
foraging at nectar source A. 
The third,branch point arises when bees follow 
dancers for one or another nectar source. The probabili- 
ty of a follower bee following dances for nectar source 
A or B is denoted by the functionf~ A or fl ~, respectively, 
which we call the following function. A recent study 
(Seeley and Towne, in preparation) has shown that fol- 
lower bees simply follow the first dancer they encounter 
and that encounters occur at random. Hence, in the situ- 
ation of just two nectar sources, A and B, the likelihood 
of encountering and following a dancer for nectar source 
A (fl A) at any particular moment can be roughly estimat- 
ed by DA/(DA + De). However, because Di includes both 
bees dancing for i and bees that have ceased dancing 
but are still in the dancing compartment, the ratio DA/ 
(DA + D~) will often be a poor estimate off1A. For exam- 
ple, if nectar source A is scarcely danced for but its 
foragers linger in the hive without dancing, then the 
ratio DA/(DA+D~) will greatly overestimate the likeli- 
hood of encountering a dancer for A. It can be much 
improved by multiplying each Di in the ratio by the 
proportion of time that foragers in the dancing compart- 
ment i are actually dancing, which we will denote as 
"~i' 
For simplicity in making calculations with the model, 
we make three further assumptions: (1) the total number 
of bees foraging is fixed, (2) all bees begin foraging si- 
multaneously, and (3) all the foragers go to either one 
of two nectar sources. In the appendix we present the 
set of differential equations that describes this model 
of colony-level decision-making. 
Model parameters. We now calculate estimates of the 
model's parameters for the situation shown in Fig. 1, 
namely a colony choosing between two equidistant su- 
crose solution feeders that are identical, except that one 
contains a 0.75-mol/1 solution and the other contains 
a 2.50-mol/1 solution. Let us first consider the rate con- 
stants. These can be calculated from the time required 
for a bee to get from one compartment to another (i.e., 
the time spent in the compartment plus the time to get 
to the next compartment). Each rate constant, p~, is 
equal to l/T,., where each T; is the time required to get 
from the relevant compartment to next. Values of T~ 


===== PAGE 10 =====
286 
appropriate to the foraging situation shown in Fig. 1 
are given in Table 2. 
The abandoning function (fx) and the dancing func- 
tion (fe) include many variables - such as the profitability 
of the nectar source, the colony's need for nectar, and 
the weather conditions - hence it is difficult to give a 
general description of these functions. However, the 
values of these functions have been measured (see Ta- 
ble 1) for a set of conditions virtually identical to those 
under which the Fig. 1 data were recorded: feeders 
400 m from the hive, high colony need for nectar, sparse 
ambient forage, and fair weather. We used the data in 
Table 1 (with appropriate interpolations and extrapola- 
tions) to determine the values offx andfe that are appro- 
priate to simulating the colony's choice between 2.50- 
tool/1 and 0.75-mol/1 nectar sources as shown in Fig. 1 
(see Table 2). 
Values of the following function, fl, were calculated 
for the two nectar sources using the more accurate of 
the two methods just described. Thus, each Di was first 
discounted by the factor % the proportion of time in 
Di that was actually spent in dancing. Each q was calcu- 
lated by taking the product of the average number of 
dance circuits and the average circuit time, and dividing 
it by the total time a bee is in the compartment D~ (T~ 
and T6 for compartments DA and D,, respectively). Gi- 
ven that the bees from the 2.50-mol/1 and 0.75-mol/1 
feeders danced on average 14 and 1 circuits, respectively 
(see Table 1), and each dance circuit for a 400-m target 
requires approximately 2.4 s (von Frisch 1967), and gi- 
ven values of Tz=90 s and T6 = 120 s (see Table 2), this 
yields values of ZA=0.38 and z,=0.02, where A and 
B represent the 2.50- and 0.75-mol/1 feeders. 
Results of the model. Figure 5 shows the pattern of simu- 
lated colonial decision-making obtained by numerical 
integration of the model's equations with the following 
starting conditions: A and B= 11, DA and DB= 1, HA 
and HB = 0, and F= 101. These values correspond closely 
to the starting conditions for the experiment shown in 
Figs. 1 and 2 in that at 8 : 00 a.m. on 19 June there were 
approximately 12 bees committed to each feeder, and 
during the course of the day a total of approximately 
125 different bees visited the two feeders. The pattern 
generated by the model closely resembles the one gener- 
ated by the colony of bees; compare Fig. 5 with Fig. 2. 
As in the case of the experimental data, the plot of the 
model's results shows consistent increases in the number 
of foragers on whichever feeder provided a 2.50-mol/1 
sugar solution, and consistent decreases at the 0.75-mol/1 
feeder. What is especially important is the comparison 
between the experimental data and the model's predic- 
tions for the afternoon of 19 June. This is because the 
starting conditions were nearly matched for the field 
and the model for this time period - 12 and 3 bees 
committed to the real and simulated north feeder 
(2.50 mol/1), and 90 and 119 bees committed to the real 
and simulated south feeder (0.75 mol/1). As the after- 
noon progressed, both in the field and in the computer, 
the number of bees foraging from the north feeder in- 
North: 0.75 mol/L 2.50 mol/L 
South: 2.50 mol/L 0.75 mol/I_ 
~ 100 North feeder bees & 
R ._ co 
o_ 
,o 50 
ob 
~_ 
10 12 2 4 
Time of day 
Fig. 5. An example of the nectar-source selection by honey bee 
colonies predicted by the model shown in Fig. 4. For this simula- 
tion the modeI's parameters were adjusted to correspond to the 
situation shown in Figs. 1 and 2, namely a colony choosing between 
two equidistant (400-m) feeders offering either a 0.75 or a 2.50-mol/ 
1 sucrose solution ad libitum. The forager group size for each feeder 
equals the sum of the bees dancing for the feeder (DA or De), 
the bees at the feeder (A or B), and the bees unloading nectar 
from the feeder (HA or H,). In this simulation, as in reality, the 
colony always focused the vast majority of its foraging effort on 
the richer feeder, and was able to respond rapidly to a reversal 
in the location of the richer feeder. This result supports the model 
of colony-level decision-making shown in Fig. 4 
Follower bees 
South feeder bees 
creased sigmoidally while those foraging from the south 
feeder decreased exponentially. The maximum rates of 
increase at the north feeder were 34 and 18 bees/30 min 
for the experimental and simulation results, respectively, 
and the corresponding maximum rates of decrease at 
the south feeder were -19 and -30 bees/30 min. The two 
sets of results show a less close match in the morning. 
This is because in the field the north feeder was loaded 
with a 1.00 rather than a 0.75-mol/1 solution, in order 
to prevent total abandonment of the north feeder, 
whereas in the simulation the north feeder was loaded 
with a 0.75-mol/1 solution, in order to keep the simula- 
tion simple. Also, in the field the bees did not begin 
foraging simultaneously, whereas in the simulation they 
all began at 8:00 a.m. sharp. 
Discussion 
How does the ability of a honey bee colony to choose 
among nectar sources emerge from the behaviors of 
thousands of bees? This question, which is the heart 
of this study, is just one form of the general question 
of self-organization in biology (Pattee 1976; Nicolis and 
Prigogine 1977; Haken 1978): how does the adaptive 
structure and functioning of a living system arise out 
of the joint actions of its subsystems? Colonies of the 
advanced social insects express this puzzle especially 
strongly since they present a clear juxtaposition of two 
levels of adaptive organization, the colony and the or- 
ganism, yet it is rarely obvious how the properties of 
a colony emerge from the collective activities of its con- 
stituent insects. Fortunately, colonies of social insects 


===== PAGE 11 =====
287 
are unusually favorable subjects for studies of self-orga- 
nization because, compared with organisms or cells, their 
dissection and experimental analysis is relatively easy. 
Nearly 20 years ago Wilson (1971, p 227) identified the 
special challenge and opportunity that the social insects 
offer to understanding biological organization when he 
wrote "the reconstruction of mass behavior from a 
knowledge of the behavior of single colony members 
is the central problem of insect sociology." 
1. Synthesis of the analysis 
This investigation began with careful documentation of 
the adaptive functioning of the whole system, i.e., nectar- 
source selection by honey bee colonies. Previous studies 
(Darwin 1877; Butler 1945; Weaver 1979; Visscher and 
Seeley 1982) had suggested that colonies can selectively 
exploit rich food sources and can rapidly shift foragers 
among food sources following changes in the food 
source array. The present findings strongly confirm these 
ideas. Even a cursory glance at the exploitation patterns 
shown in Figs. 1 and 2 reveals these skills. 
The next step was to explain these colonial foraging 
patterns in terms of the behaviors of individual bees. 
Fortunately, these two levels of description are directly 
bridged by the fact that the colony-level patterns 
(numbers of foragers allocated to each food source) are 
a direct result of two processes (recruitment to and aban- 
donment of food sources) that are rather easily under- 
stood in terms of bee-level behavior patterns. Hence the 
key to linking the colonial and organismal descriptions 
of nectar-source selection was understanding how indi- 
vidual bees modulate their colony's rates of recruitment 
and abandonment to different nectar sources in accor- 
dance with their different levels of profitability. 
By recording the behaviors of bees visiting a feeder, 
and periodically changing the profitability of the feeder, 
we were able to assemble a detailed picture of the multi- 
dimensional modulation of foraging behavior in relation 
to nectar source profitability (Table 1). Behaviors that 
the bees vary include the strength of waggle dancing, 
the tempo of visits to the food source, and the likelihood 
of returning to the food source. Other investigators (von 
Frisch 1967, p 45; Nunez 1966, 1970, 1982) have ana- 
lyzed subsets of these behavioral variables in a similar 
fashion and have reported comparable patterns of be- 
havior modulation in accordance with food source prof- 
itability. Therefore, we feel that the patterns shown in 
Table 1 are general for bees. In broad terms, as food 
source profitability increases, the duration of dancing 
increases, the tempo of foraging increases, and the prob- 
ability of abandoning the food source decreases. 
This begs the question: how does a forager assess 
the profitability of its nectar source? Three hypotheses 
(H1-H3) were examined. The first (H1) is that each bee 
makes this assessment by visiting several nectar sources 
and directly comparing its nectar source with others to 
estimate its relative profitability. A priori this seems im- 
probable because in nature the flower patches exploited 
by a colony are widely scattered over an area extending 
several kilometers from the hive (Visscher and Seeley 
1982) and are not easily located, even by bees that are 
directed to the patches by recruitment dances (Esch and 
Bastian 1970; Mautz 1971; Seeley and Visscher 1988). 
More importantly, our data contradict HI, at least as 
a mechanism commonly used by bees. Of 117 bees in- 
volved in generating the pattern of selective exploitation 
on the morning of 19 June (see Figs. 1 and 2), only 
2 visited more than one nectar source. 
What about the second hypothesis (H2), that the 
food storer bees compare the profitabilities of different 
nectar loads and indicate (by the willingness to accept 
nectar) to each forager the relative profitability of its 
forage? According to this hypothesis, nectar source qual- 
ity is assessed by bees simply as a function of the sugar 
concentration of the nectar, since this is evidently all 
that a food storer bee knows about a nectar source. 
But as the experiment reported here (Fig. 3) has shown, 
bees evaluate nectar source profitability as a function 
of variables besides sugar concentration, such as distance 
from the hive. This result falsifies H2. This conclusion 
is reinforced by the reports of Boch (1956) and Wad- 
dington (1982, 1985) that foragers adjust the strength 
of dancing in response to multiple variables affecting 
the energetic profitability of a nectar source - such as 
distance from the hive, difficulty of obtaining the nectar, 
and nectar abundance - not just sugar concentration. 
By process of elimination, our results support the 
third hypothesis (H3) that each forager independently 
assesses the profitability of its nectar source and does 
so without reference to other nectar sources. This infor- 
mation processing evidently works as follows. In visiting 
a flower patch, a nectar forager takes in information 
about the energetic gains and costs associated with for- 
aging at the patch - as determined by such variables 
as the distance from the hive, sugar concentration of 
the nectar, and nectar abundance - and integrates this 
information to arrive at an estimate of the overall ener- 
getic profitability of its patch. Each forager's nervous 
system is evidently calibrated so that it knows whether 
this level of profitability is low, high, or some point 
in between. Nectar sources that rank low will generally 
elicit abandoment of the source, and nectar sources that 
rank high will generally elicit recruitment to the source, 
though the precise levels of profitability that are the 
thresholds for abandonment and recruitment are ad- 
justed by the foragers as a function of other variables 
independent of any one nectar source, such as the col- 
ony's nutritional status (Lindauer 1948; Seeley 1989), 
the seasonal forage availability (Lindauer 1948; Seeley 
1986), and the weather conditions (Schufi 1952; Boch 
1956). If all the foragers in a colony have shared rules 
for determining the profitability of nectar sources and 
for adjusting the response thresholds, then even though 
the foragers operate independently and with limited in- 
formation, they will generate a coherent colony-level re- 
sponse to different food sources, wherein better food 
sources are recruited to and heavily exploited while 
poorer ones are abandoned. To be sure, the details re- 
main obscure about the information processing inside 
a bee as it assesses the profitability of a nectar source, 


===== PAGE 12 =====
288 
especially how this calculation is performed by the cen- 
tral nervous system; however, what is now clear is that 
each nectar forager makes its own, independent assess- 
ment of the profitability of its nectar source and that 
it makes this assessment based only on local information 
from her particular nectar source. Hence, paradoxically, 
global order emerges from the actions of many indepen- 
dent actors, and moreover, none of the actors possesses 
an overview of the total operation (though they do pos- 
sess shared information about the rules for assessing nec- 
tar source profitability and about such variables as the 
colony's nutritional state and the weather). 
We now know a good deal about how bees modulate 
their behavior in relation to nectar source profitability, 
but is this behavioral modulation, performed by all the 
foragers in a colony, really sufficient to account for the 
nectar-source selection ability of the colony as a whole? 
Evidently it is. The computer simulation of decision- 
making by a colony wherein each forager simply adjusts 
her behavior according to the profitability of her nectar 
source and, when being recruited to a new nectar source, 
follows a dancer chosen at random from among the 
dancing foragers, yields patterns of nectar source exploi- 
tation that are remarkably similar to what was observed 
experimentally (Figs. 2 and 5). This does not imply that 
the rather simple model (Fig. 4) underlying these simula- 
tions contains a complete description of the decision- 
making process. Nevertheless, the match between the 
model's predictions and reality certainly suggests that 
this model captures the essence of the decision-making 
process. This can be thought of as a kind of natural 
selection among alternative nectar sources as foragers 
from higher profitability sources "survive" (continue 
visiting their source) longer and "reproduce" (recruit 
other foragers) better than do foragers from lower prof- 
itability sources. The net result is that the percentage 
of a colony's forager population associated with a nectar 
source will automatically increase if the profitability of 
the nectar source is relatively high, and will inevitably 
decrease if its profitability is relatively low. Hence, inside 
a bee hive, as in the natural world in general, the blind 
process of natural selection generates impressive order, 
and we need not invoke any higher-level decision-maker 
(no overseer) to explain this order. 
2. The rationale for decentralized control 
This conclusion is important, for it points out that the 
control of a colony's foraging behavior is highly decen- 
tralized. Indeed, it seems clear that it is distributed 
among all of the foragers in the colony, with each bee 
independently adjusting its behavior to what is appro- 
priate to its own food source, and the colony-level de- 
cision-making arising automatically out of the resultant 
dynamics in recruitment and abandonment. Decentral- 
ized control of colony functioning has been reported 
in a number of contexts, including recruitment to food 
sources in fire ants (Wilson 1962), queen rearing and 
thermoregulation in honey bees (Baird and Seeley 1983; 
Heinrich 1985), nest building in polybiine wasps (Jeanne 
1986), food-source selection in pavement ants (Pasteels 
et al. 1987a, b), and raiding in army ants (Deneubourg 
et al. 1989; Franks 1989), to cite just a handful of exam- 
ples. It seems that distributed control will prove the rule, 
at least in the advanced eusocial species where colony 
populations are generally on the order of l03 or larger 
[there is good evidence of centralized control in the pri- 
mitively eusocial insects such as paper ~asps, Polistes, 
where colonies usually contain less than 102 individuals 
(Reeve and Gamboa 1983)]. Why might this be? 
More precisely, what factors have favored or disfa- 
vored the evolution of decentralized control for large 
societies? Considering first the reasons that would seem 
to disfavor decentralized control, there is no question 
that omitting a central authority leaves a group prone 
to conflicting actions among its members as individuals 
respond to their different, local situations rather than 
the shared, global condition of the group as a whole. 
Colonies of social insects frequently demonstrate this 
problem, for example, when an ant colony changes nest 
sites and some workers carry brood out of the old site 
while others carry them back in again (Wilson 1971, 
p 224). Also, without anyone supervising a group, redun- 
dancies within the group are likely to arise, especially 
for any activity that requires a long time to produce 
negative feedback effects to regulate the number of indi- 
viduals undertaking the activity. Furthermore, the ab- 
sence of a strong central authority within a group prob- 
ably hampers its ability to amount a rapid, global re- 
sponse to a critical stress, such as an attack by a preda- 
tor. On the other hand, distributing the control of a 
group widely among its members almost certainly en- 
hances its ability to make a rapid, local response to a 
stress because it eliminates the need for time-consuming 
communication between the peripheral sensor/effector 
individuals and the central decision-making individuals. 
Also, distributing the control may often make the group 
less prone to incapacitating damage since the group's 
functioning will not depend critically on the status of 
a small subset of supervisory individuals. 
We suspect, however, that the principal reason that 
decentralized control has evolved in colonies of ad- 
vanced social insects is that it is a means for a society 
to achieve a high degree of organization without highly 
sophisticated communication and computation devices 
(Hayek 1945; Simon 1981). If the large colonies of social 
insects were run by a central authority, then each colony 
would have to possess an elaborate communication net- 
work so that information about the entire colony could 
flow adequately to the central planners, and so that 
orders from the central planners could be transmitted 
back to the appropriate members of the colony. Equally 
importantly, the central planning body would have to 
possess extremely sophisticated information-processing 
abilities to perform the difficult calculations needed to 
integrate information about the entire colony and pro- 
duce orders that would result in a rational allocation 
of the colony's resources. Both of these complex devices 


===== PAGE 13 =====
289 
of social coordination are avoided in colonies with de- 
centralized control wherein individuals make relatively 
simple decisions using information that is directly at 
hand. A l t h o u g h  this may seem like a decidedly crude 
way to build a well organized society, this study of the 
honey bee society illustrates that it can be remarkably 
effective. 
Acknowledgements. This project has been supported by the U.S. 
National Science Foundation, through grants BNS-8606778 and 
BNS-8916006 to Tom Seeiey and through a graduate fellowship 
to Scott Camazir~e-i and by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
through Hatch grant NY(C)-191407. We gratefully acknowledge 
this support. We also thank Dr. Wolfgang Kirchner (University 
of Wiirzburg) for suggesting the design of the experiment that 
tests whether or not food storer bees preferentially unload foragers 
bearing nectar loads of high sugar concentration (H2). Bill Shields, 
Director of the Cranberry Lake Biological Station, and everyone 
else at the CLBS, deserve our deepest gratitude for providing us 
with a field setting for the experiments that was ideal, both ecologi- 
cally and psychologically. Finally, one of us (T.D.S) wants especial- 
ly to thank Mary Eickwort, Oliver Habicht, Scott Kelley, and Sa- 
mantha Sonnak, who steadfastly tended the feeders during the 
experiments, despite the heavy attacks by blackflies, and Robin 
Hadlock Seeley, who made it possible for T.D.S. to go to Cranberry 
Lake and perform the critical study with the colony of labelled 
bees despite pressing needs at home. 
References 
Baird DH, Seeley TD (1983) An equilibrium theory of queen pro- 
duction in honeybee colonies preparing to swarm. Behav Ecol 
Sociobiol 13 : 221-228 
Boch R (1956) Die Tfinze der Bienen bei nahen und fernen Tracht- 
quellen. Z Vergl Physiol 38:136-167 
Butler CG (1.945) The influence of various physical and biological 
factors of the environment on honeybee activity. An examina- 
tion of the relationship between activity and nectar concentra- 
tion and abundance. J Exp Biol 21:5 12 
Camazine S, Sneyd J (1991) A mathematical model of colony-level 
nectar source selection by honey bees: self-organization 
through simple individual rules. J Theor Biol (in press) 
Darwin CR (1877) The effects of cross and self fertilization in 
the vegetable kingdom. Appleton, New York 
Deneubourg JL, Goss S, Franks N, Pasteels JM (1989) The blind 
leading the blind: modelling chemically mediated army ant raid 
patterns. J Insect Behav 2:719-725 
Esch HA, Bastian JA (1970) How do newly recruited honey bees 
approach a food site ? Z Vergl Physiol 68:175-i 81 
Franks NR (1989) Army ants: a collective intelligence. Am Sci 
77:138-145 
Franks NR, Fletcher CR (1983) Spatial patterns in army ant forag- 
ing and migration: Eciton burehelli on Barro Colorado Island, 
Panama. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 12:261-270 
Frisch K yon (1967) The dance language and orientation of bees. 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge 
Haken H (1978) Synergetics an introduction. Springer, New York 
Berlin Heidelberg 
Hayek FA (1945) The use of knowledge in society. Am Econ Rev 
35 : 519-530 
Heinrich B (1985) The social physiology of temperature regulation 
in honeybees. Fortschr Zool 31:393~406 
Hofstadter DR (1979) G6del, Escher, Bach: an eternal golden 
braid. Basic Books, New York 
H611dobler B (1981) Foraging and spatiotemporal territories in the 
honey ant Myrmecocystus mimicus Wheeler (Hymenoptera: 
Formicidae). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 9 : 301-314 
Jeanne RL (1986) The organization of work in Polybia occidentalis: 
costs and benefits of specialization in a social wasp. Behav 
Ecol Sociobiol 19:333-341 
Lindauer M (1948) Qber die Einwirkung yon Duft- und Ge- 
schmacksstoffen sowie anderer Faktoren auf die Tfinze der 
Bienen. Z Vergl Physiol 31:348~412 
Lindauer M (1955) Schwarmbienen auf Wohnungssuche. Z Vergl 
Physiol 37 : 263-324 
Lindauer M (1961) Communication among social bees. Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge 
Lindauer M (1975) Verstfindigung im Bienenstaat. Fischer, Stutt- 
gart New York 
Lumsden CJ, H611dobler B (1983) Ritualized combat and intercol- 
ony communication in ants. J Theor Biol 100:81-98 
Markl H (1985) Manipulation, modulation, information, cogni- 
tion: some of the riddles of communication. Fortschr Zool 
31 : 163-194 
Mautz D (1971) Der Kommunikationseffekt der Schw~inzelt~inze 
bei Apis mell~'ca carnica (Pollm.). Z Vergl Physiol 72:192220 
Nicolis G, Prigogine I (1977) Self-organization in nonequilibrium 
systems. Wiley, New York 
Nfifiez JA (1966) Quantitative Beziehungen zwischen den Eigen- 
schaften yon Futterquellen und dem Verhalten von Sammel- 
bienen. Z Vergl Physiol 53:142-164 
Ntifiez JA (1970) The relationship between sugar flow and foraging 
and recruiting behaviour of honey bees (Apis mellifera L.) Anim 
Behav 18:527-538 
Nfifiez JA (1982) Honeybee foraging strategies at a food source 
in relation to its distance from the hive and the rate of sugar 
flow. J Apic Res 21:139 150 
Pasteels JM, Deneubourg J-L, Goss S (1987a) Self-organization 
mechanisms in ant societies (I): Trail recruitment to newly dis- 
covered food sources. In: Pasteels JM, Deneubourg J-L (eds) 
From individual to collective behavior in social insects. Birk- 
h/iuser, Basel, pp 155-175 
Pasteels JM, Deneubourg J-L, Goss S (1987b) Transmission and 
amplification of information in a changing environment: the 
case of insect societies. In: Prigogine I, Sanglier M (eds) Law 
of nature and human conduct. G.O.R.D.E.S., Bruxelles, pp 
129-156 
Pattee HH (1976) Physical theories of biological co-ordination. 
In: Grene M, Mendelsohn E (eds) Topics in the philosophy 
of biology, vol 27. Boston studies in philosophy of science. 
Reidel, Boston, pp 153-173 
Reeve HK, Gamboa GJ (1983) Colony activity integration in pri- 
mitively eusocial wasps: the role of the queen (Polistesfuseatus, 
Hymenoptera: Vespidae). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 13:63 74 
Schufi L (1952) Untersuchungen fiber die Einflul3 meteorologische 
Elemente auf das Verhalten der Bienen. Z Vergl Physio134:258- 
277 
Seeley TD (1982) How honeybees find a home. Sci Am 
247 (Oct): 158-168 
Seeley TD (1985) Honeybee ecology. Princeton University Press, 
Princeton 
Seeley TD (1986) Social foraging by honeybees: how colonies allo- 
cate foragers among patches of flowers. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 
19: 343-354 
Seeley TD (1989) Social foraging in honey bees: how nectar for- 
agers assess their colony's nutritional status. Behav Ecol Socio- 
biol 24:181-199 
Seeley TD, Levien RA (1987) A colony of mind. The beehive as 
thinking machine. The Sciences 27: 38-43 
Seeley TD, Visscher PK (1988) Assessing the benefits of coopera- 
tion in honeybee foraging: search costs, forage quality, and 
competitive ability. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 22:229-237 
Simon HA (1981) The sciences of the artificial, 2nd edn. MIT 
Press, Cambridge 
Sokal RR, Rohlf FJ (1981) Biometry, 2nd edn. Freeman, San Fran- 
cisco 
Visscher PK, Seeley TD (1982) Foraging strategy of honeybee colo- 
nies in a temperate deciduous forest. Ecology 63:179(~1801 


===== PAGE 14 =====
290 
Waddington KD (1982) Honey bee foraging profitability and round 
dance correlates. J Comp Physiol 148 : 297-301 
Waddington KD (1985) Cost-intake information used in foraging. 
J Insect Physiol 31:891-897 
Weaver N (1979) Possible recruitment of foraging honeybees to 
high-reward areas of the same plant species. J Apic Res 18 : 179- 
183 
Wilson EO (1962) Chemical communication among workers of 
the fire ant Solenopsis saevissima (Fr. Smith). 1. The organiza- 
tion of mass-foraging. Anim Behav 10:134-147 
Wilson EO (1971) The insect societies. Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge 
Wilson EO, H611dobler B (1988) Dense heterarchies and mass com- 
munication as the basis of organization in ant colonies. Trends 
Ecol Evol 3: 65-68 
Appendix 
This section presents the set of differential equations that describe 
the rate of change of the number of bees in each compartment 
shown in Fig. 4 over time. The symbols in these equations are 
defined in the text accompanying Fig. 4. For a more detailed discus- 
sion of the model represented by these equations, see Camazine 
and Sneyd (1991). 
dA/dt = (1 -fe~) (1 -f~) p~H~ +p~D~ +f~ Ap~F--paA 
dDA/dt =f~A(1 --f~) p~H~ --p~D~ 
dHA/dt=paA -p~Ha 
dF/dt=f.~ap~HA+ffpsH~-p~F 
dB/dt = (1 -fe~)(1 -fx ~) p~H~ +p6D~ +f, ~p4F-p,B 
dDn/dt =fe~(~l -f~n) psHn--p6Dn 
dHn/dt =pTB-psHn 
