

===== PAGE 1 =====
REVIEW
Swarm intelligence: A survey of model classiﬁcation
and applications
Chao WANGa, Shuyuan ZHANGa, Tianhang MAa, Yuetong XIAOa,
Michael Zhiqiang CHENb, Lei WANGa,*
a School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
b School of Automation, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China
Received 20 November 2023; revised 28 December 2023; accepted 28 February 2024
Available online 20 March 2024
KEYWORDS
Swarm intelligence;
Ant colony optimization;
Self-driven particle models;
Pheromone communication
models;
Leadership decision models;
Empirical research models
Abstract Swarm Intelligence (SI) is a collective behavior that emerges from interaction between
individuals in a group. Typical SI includes ﬁsh schooling, ant foraging, bird migration, and so
on. A great deal of models have been introduced to characterize the mechanism of SI. This article
reviews several typical models and classiﬁes them into four categories: self-driven particle models,
with Boids model as the primary example; pheromone communication models, including the ant
colony pheromone model which serves as the foundation for ant colony optimization; leadership
decision models, utilizing the hierarchical dynamics model of pigeon ﬂock as a prime instance;
empirical research models, which employ the topological rule model of starling ﬂock as a classic
model. On this basis, each type of model is elaborated upon in terms of its typical model overview,
applications, and model evaluation. More speciﬁcally, multi-agent swarm control, path optimiza-
tion and obstacle avoidance, formation and consensus control, trajectory tracking in the dense
crowd and social networks analysis are surveyed in the application of each category, respectively.
Furthermore, the more precise and effective modeling techniques for leadership decision and empir-
ical research models are described. Limitations and potential directions for further exploration in
the study of SI are presented.
/C2112024 Production and hosting by Elsevier Ltd. on behalf of Chinese Society of Aeronautics and
Astronautics. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Introduction
SI has its origin in the observation and study of social behavior
in gregarious animals. Its distribution, ﬂexibility, and robust-
ness advantages have provided new solutions to many chal-
lenging complex problems. Initially proposed by Beni and
Wang to describe the dynamics of swarm robots, SI has, since
evolved, been deﬁned in various ways across different ﬁelds.
1
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: lwang@buaa.edu.cn (L. WANG).
Peer review under responsibility of Editorial Committee of CJA.
Production and hosting by Elsevier
Chinese Journal of Aeronautics, (2025), 38(3): 102982
Chinese Society of Aeronautics and Astronautics
& Beihang University
Chinese Journal of Aeronautics
cja@buaa.edu.cn
www.sciencedirect.com
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cja.2024.03.019
1000-9361 /C2112024 Production and hosting by Elsevier Ltd. on behalf of Chinese Society of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

===== PAGE 2 =====
In natural science, it is typically deﬁned as a collective
behavior that emerges from interaction between individuals
in a group, whether they are animals or cells. SI refers to the
use of algorithms and techniques that involve multiple intelli-
gent agents collaborating, such as robots or sensor nodes.
2
In social science, it is deﬁned as the intelligent behavior exhib-
ited by groups of humans through their interactions and
collaborations.3
This article primarily focuses on SI within the natural
sciences, where the intelligence of a group often surpasses that
of its members. This phenomenon is evident in various biolog-
ical clusters,
4,5 such as ﬁsh schooling, 6–8 ant foraging, 9–11 wolf
predation,12 and bird migration. 13 Despite individual limita-
tions, these groups demonstrate orderly self-organization and
coordination behaviors at the group level, displaying traits
such as distribution, self-organization, cooperation, stability,
and adaptability.
14
Researchers have extensively studied the unique wisdom of
biological clusters by establishing models, to uncover the inter-
nal mechanisms of SI through simulating the collective behav-
iors. One of the earliest models, the Boids model by
Reynolds,
15 summarized three fundamental rules governing
collective behavior. Since then, research has been focused on
simulating SI by designing group interaction rules over a long
period. For instance, typical models such as swarm model
16
and R-A model 17 were both developed based on Boids model,
and the well-known Vicsek model 18 was established from a
physical perspective. In addition to the models established by
the rules, there are some models based on pheromones, such
as the ant colony models
19–21 and bees models. 22 However,
most of these models were developed in the absence of empir-
ical data due to the limitations in data collection technology
over the past decades. Until the development of tracking posi-
tioning and sonar detection technology, this issue has been
resolved. This has made it more convenient to observe the
behavior of biological clusters and gain a deeper understand-
ing of the spatial aggregation and order of movement of indi-
viduals in clusters,
14 for example, the model of starling ﬂocks 23
and the model of ﬁsh shoals 24. Recently, advancements in
machine learning have led to increased interest and progress
in data-driven models that utilize observed data to yield the
qualitatively same collective behavior as exhibited by real
swarm.
25–27 This integration of technology and biological
insights marks a promising direction for further understanding
the wisdom of biological clusters and their internal mecha-
nisms. Since data-driven models are constructed based on
real-world data, they can be regarded as a speciﬁc category
of empirical research models.
Building upon the insights gained from these biological
cluster behavior models, corresponding algorithms have been
formalized and are referred to as biology-based algorithms
28
in various literature, or simply swarm intelligence algo-
rithms.29 They can be categorized into six groups based on
the number of algorithms used and their biological inspiration:
P-article Swarm Optimization (PSO),
30 Artiﬁcial Fish Swarm
(AFS),31 Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), 32 Artiﬁcial Bee
Colony (ABC), 33 Bacterial Foraging Optimization (BFO), 34
and other swarm intelligence algorithms. 35,36 These heuristic
optimization algorithms have gained widespread adoption
and are employed in diverse applications, including parameter
optimization,
37 system identiﬁcation, 38 robots39 and other
optimization problems of engineering ﬁelds. 40 While our focus
is primarily on reviewing swarm intelligence models rather
than the algorithm, we will discuss some of them in subsequent
content.
In addition to algorithms inspired by biology, many appli-
cations are directly derived from animal collective behaviors.
Unlike the aforementioned algorithm applications in optimiza-
tion problems, these applications primarily refer to coopera-
tive unmanned cluster systems, including aerial, ground, and
marine robotics swarms. In aerial robotics swarm, for exam-
ple, the task assignment algorithm and interaction mode
should be carefully designed to support the cooperative
decision-making process of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV)
swarm, which is recently inspired by biological swarm behav-
iors in various applications.
41 Besides, UAV swarms take
actions to carry out assigned tasks through various conﬁgura-
tions of formation control. There are several key technologies
necessary for autonomous ﬂight, including formation mainte-
nance,
42,43 formation reconﬁguration, 44,45 and obstacle avoid-
ance.46 In ground robotics swarm, for example, with the
enhanced development of Unmanned Ground Vehicle
(UGV) systems, the exploration and veriﬁcation of swarm
cooperative algorithms have been further deepened. Particle
robotics are controlled to achieve autonomous locomotion,
phototaxis, and object transportation through a simple dis-
tributed algorithm inspired by collective cell migration phe-
nomena in biology.
47 In the ﬁeld of marine robotics swarm,
researchers have conducted extensive research to investigate
communication technology, 48 navigation, and location tech-
nology49 inspired by collective behaviors in biology. Particu-
larly, it should be noted that using the swarm algorithms to
control robotics is different from simulating a swarm. The for-
mer aims to achieve a speciﬁc task or goal, while the latter aims
to understand the mechanisms of collective behavior and inter-
action. Hence, studying the swarm intelligence models, algo-
rithms and applications holds immense academic and
practical value. The hierarchical distribution of swarm intelli-
gence is shown in Fig. 1 .
15–21,30–36,41–49
Several literatures 50–52 have reviewed SI models, algo-
rithms, and applications because of their excellent perfor-
mance in various problems. They often reviewed SI models
from a speciﬁc perspective, such as a physical perspective 53
or a biological perspective. 54 The reviews about SI algorithms
and applications usually focus on representative algorithms,
such as PSO and ACO, and speciﬁc application problems, such
as Internet of Things (IoT) and features seletion.
55–58 How-
ever, there is seldom a timeline or appropriate classiﬁcation
in the literature reviews regarding models, and there is limited
exploration and summarization of the underlying models in
the reviews of algorithms and applications. In other words,
there is rare research that has reviewed SI algorithms and
applications based on underlying models, which is the gap that
this article aims to ﬁll. The main contributions of this article
are shown as follows:
(1) This article provides a new categorization of typical
swarm intelligence models. We organized typical models
based on their chronological emergence, starting from
time when the most representative Boids model
appeared up to the present. Following this, we found
that the emergence of representative models during dif-
ferent periods allowed us to divide our focus timeline
into four distinct periods. We summarized the common
2 C. WANG et al.

===== PAGE 3 =====
characteristics of representative models within each per-
iod and classiﬁed the existing typical models into four
categories: self-driven particle models, pheromone com-
munication models, leadership decision models and
empirical research models.
(2) Each type of model is elaborated upon its typical model
overview and applications. In section of self-driven parti-
cle models, we overview typical models and their applica-
tions in multi-agent swarm control. Then, we delve into
PSO, summarize its improvement methods and overview
its applications in the aerospace area. In section of phero-
mone communication models, we focus on representative
ant colony models, summarize ACO and its improved ver-
sion, and explore its applications in path optimization and
obstacle avoidance. In section of leadership decision mod-
els, we introduce typical models and outline methodolo-
gies for leadership inference, emphasizing their
application in formation and consensus control. In section
of empirical research models, we elaborate on small-scale
and large-scale cluster models. Moreover, we summarize
techniques for constructing empirical research models
and survey their applications in trajectory tracking within
dense crowds, as well as social network analysis.
The rest of this article is structured as follows: in Section 2 ,
the concept of SI is introduced, and the existing typical models
of SI are divided into four categories, including self-driven par-
ticle models, pheromone communication models, leadership
decision models and empirical research models. Each type of
model is elaborated upon in terms of its typical model over-
view, related applications, and model evaluation from Section 3
to Section 6 , respectively. The conclusion and future research
direction are presented in Section 7 .
2. Classiﬁcation of typical models of SI
Many social animals, such as ants, birds, and bees, can carry
out complex tasks through the interaction and coordination
of many individuals, without the need for a centralized control
mechanism. Fig. 2 shows the SI of ants, birds and bees. The
study of SI aims to identify the mechanisms underlying collec-
tive behaviors and to develop algorithms and techniques that
can be used to design intelligent, adaptive, and robust systems.
One of the most important tasks is to establish models to iden-
tify the mechanisms. A variety of models have been developed
for SI. It ﬁrst aroused the interest of researchers in the ﬁeld of
computer graphics,
15 and subsequently became the subject of a
great deal of physics research and applied mathematics. 59,60
The goal of establishing SI models is to clarify how individuals
form group-level collective behavior through local interac-
tion.
61 Because groups involve a large number of discrete indi-
viduals, many physicists consider it in terms of statistical
mechanics. This methodology treats SI as an emergent prop-
erty, resulting from the interactions of numerous individuals
conceptualized as particles. The primary focus is on construct-
ing microscopic models to discern the determinants of group-
level dynamics. This bottom-up approach, emphasizing the
self-organizing nature of groups, allows for a stable model of
distributed control, where interactions are limited yet collec-
tively shape coherent group behaviors. This framework not
only facilitates nuanced exploration of SI but also aligns with
principles of self-organization, making it a robust model for
studying complex systems.
An alternative approach is top-down modeling, where the
focus lies in initiating the modeling process with the generation
of group-level behaviors, proposing simpliﬁed models to repli-
Fig. 1 Hierarchical distribution of swarm intelligence.
Fig. 2 SI of ants, birds and bees ( https://lib.ia.ac.cn/news/newsdetail/68504).
Swarm intelligence: A survey of model classiﬁcation and applications 3

===== PAGE 4 =====
cate this behavior. Top-down models aim to elucidate the
workings of a clustered system rather than delving into the
underlying reasons for its functionality. While theoretical
models inherently differ from actual systems, requiring simpli-
ﬁcation compared to natural clusters, their strength lies in the
ease with which they can be translated into the physical sys-
tems of practical design. This simpliﬁcation, while departing
from the intricacies of real-world animal clusters, enhances
the model’s power, rendering it highly effective for application
in practical systems.
As discussed above, the existing models can be divided into
bottom-up and top-down models. On the macro level, such
classiﬁcation includes almost all models and is comprehensive.
On the micro level, however, such classiﬁcation is less speciﬁc.
Because it just focuses on the modeling method itself and
ignores the speciﬁc mechanism in the different collective
behavior, a more detailed classiﬁcation is needed.
Firstly, we organized typical models based on their chrono-
logical emergence, starting from time when the most represen-
tative Boids model appeared up to the present. We found that
the emergence of representative models during different peri-
ods allowed us to divide our focus timeline into four distinct
periods. We summarized the common characteristics of repre-
sentative models within each period and classiﬁed the existing
typical models into four categories: models grounded in dis-
tance rules, models shaped by pheromone interaction, models
incorporating hierarchical structures, and models stemming
from empirical research. These categories are named as: self-
driven particle models, pheromone communication models,
leadership decision models and empirical research models.
The categorization is illustrated in Fig. 3 .
15–19,30,62–71 Unlike
traditional bottom-up and top-down categorizations, our clas-
siﬁcation offers a more comprehensive perspective by incorpo-
rating the chronological sequence of each model type and their
highlights shared characteristics over different periods.
3. Self-driven particle models
Self-driven particle models are the most classic models to
describe SI. This kind of model simulates the individual in
the biological cluster as a particle in a computer and realizes
the movement behavior of a particle swarm by giving the par-
ticle a certain speed and designing simple local control rules, to
simulate the simple collective behavior of the real biological
group. Although this model is simple, many researchers have
paid attention to it, as it is extremely effective.
3.1. Typical self-driven particle models
3.1.1. Boids model
The earliest and most classic model of self-driven particle mod-
els is the Boids model built by Reynold
15 in 1987 to simulate
the movement of bird ﬂocks on the computer. The most iconic
feature of this model is that it provides three principles for sim-
ulating cluster movement: separation, alignment, and cohe-
sion. The three principles are of decreasing priority.
Separation means that individuals in a ﬂock should keep a dis-
tance from their neighbors to avoid collisions. Alignment
means that the speed of individuals should match the speed
of individuals in the neighborhood as much as possible. Prox-
imity means that individuals try to stay close to their neigh-
bors. Reynold used these three principles, combined with
distributed control and particle systems, to simulate the ﬂight
of birds in a computer.
3.1.2. Swarm model
Based on Boids model, the randomness of individual particle
evolution was added to create the swarm model in Ref. 16.
Particle velocity and acceleration in this model are described as
V ¼ c
1V1 þ c2V2 þ c3V3 þ c4V4 þ c5V5 ð1Þ
A ¼ m
 
V
Vjj
!
ð2Þ
where ciði ¼ 1; 2; 3; 4; 5Þ is a constant, V1 is the vector away
from the neighbor within the crowding radius, V2 is a vector
pointing to the center of the environment, V3 is the average
neighbor speed of the particle, V4 is the vector pointing to
the center of mass of all particles, V5 is a random vector, Vjj
represents the modulus of V, and m is a constant that determi-
nes the maximum acceleration of the particle. Eq. (2) normal-
izes the velocity and sets the acceleration of the particle as the
product of this result and m. By setting different parameters in
Fig. 3 A categorization of swarm intelligence models and their representative works.
4 C. WANG et al.

===== PAGE 5 =====
the swarm model, different forms of swarm formation such as
ring and ﬁgure-of-eight were identiﬁed in Ref. 72.
3.1.3. R-A model
The Boids model and swarm model are the simplest models of
SI. Although they can simulate the move ment state of a
swarm, these models cannot fully explain the well-deﬁned col-
lective behavior seen in many species. Based on the abstract
description and the Boids model of an obvious aggregation
tendency in biological systems, a more biologically realistic
collective behavior model was established in Ref. 17, which
is called the R-A model. It controls the cluster based on the
following two rules:
(1) Individuals in the group try to keep a minimum distance
from other individuals at all times, and this rule has the
highest priority;
(2) If an individual is not equipped to implement rule (1), an
individual will tend to gravitate toward others and align
with its neighbors to avoid isolation.
Based on these two rules, the individual-centered surround-
ing area is divided into three non-overlapping spatial layers, as
shown in Fig. 4,
17 which is a representation of an individual in
the model centered at the origin: ZOR is the Zone of Repul-
sion, ZOO is the Zone of Orientation, and ZOA is the Zone
of Attraction. The possible blind volume behind an individual
is also shown. a is the ﬁeld of perception.
R-A model can simulate collective behavior based on the
above rules. Because the constructed hierarchical space is
3D, it can also provide some explanation for the collective
behavior of airborne biological clusters, and it is more realistic
than the Boids model.
3.1.4. Vicsek model
Among the numerous self-driven particle models established
from a physical perspective, the most representative model is
Vicsek model developed in 1995.
18 The velocity of the particles
in the model is determined by a simple rule and random per-
turbation. The only rule of the model is that at each time step,
a given particle moving at a constant absolute velocity, its
direction of motion is updated to the average direction of its
neighbors, whose radius is r, and some random perturbation
is added. In detail, at t ¼ 0, N particles are randomly dis-
tributed in a square cell with the linear size of L, each particle
has the same velocity v, but the direction h is randomly dis-
tributed. The absolute velocity of all particles is measured at
the same time in each period, and the position of particles is
changed according to the following formula:
x
iðt þ 1Þ¼ xiðtÞþ viðtÞDt ð3Þ
where xiðtÞ is the position of i at t, viðtÞ is the speed of i at t,
and Dt is the unit time step. The velocity viðt þ 1Þ of i at
t þ 1 is constructed as a vector whose absolute magnitude is
v and whose direction is determined by hðt þ 1Þ, which is
obtained by
hðt þ 1Þ¼ hðtÞr þ Dh ð4Þ
where Dh is the noise that is a random number selected from
½/C0 g=2; g=2/C138 with uniform probability, g is noise intensity, and
hðtÞr is the average value of the motion direction of surround-
ing particles, including the particle, in the neighborhood with a
radius of r, expressed by an arctangent function:
hðtÞr ¼ arctan sin ðhðtÞÞr= cosðhðtÞrÞ
/C2/C3
ð5Þ
When v, g and density q ¼ N=L2 are given, the simulation
of different forms of SI can be realized based on the individual
velocity and position updating rules. It is not difﬁcult to see
that this model is also simple, but it has a signiﬁcant difference
from the Boids model in that there is only one rule in this
model, namely the alignment rule. The reason why the simula-
tion of SI can be realized is greatly related to the selection of
noise. The Vicsek model mimics the movement of a colony
behavior model based on simple local alignment rules, but a
theoretical explanation for this model is not provided. To this
end, Jadbabaie et al.
73 analyzed the system properties of the
Vicsek model from the perspectives of control and mathemat-
ics, gave its theoretical explanation, proved that it is a stable
linear switching system, and pointed out that as long as the
interactive network can remain continuous in time, the collec-
tive behavior can be realized.
Because of its simplicity and interpretability, the Vicsek
model has been favored by many researchers, and some
improved models have been produced. These models not only
inherit the simple alignment rules but also add some more
complex functions. For example, phase transitions in the col-
lective behavior of local interactions of self-driven particles
with cohesive and non-cohesive group noise were studied,
and it was found in Ref. 74 that such transitions are always
discontinuous. Go¨ nci et al.
75 studied phase transitions in a
3D Vicsek model and found that the results are similar to those
in a 2D environment. The 2D and 3D types of the Vicsek
model were comprehensively studied in Ref. 76.
3.2. Particle swarm optimization
The models discussed above, in which the simulation of SI is
realized, are typical self-driven particle models. In this section,
PSO inspired by the social behavior of birds ﬂocking or ﬁsh
schooling, where each individual, called a particle, moves in
Fig. 4 Spatial stratiﬁcation of R-A model. 17
Swarm intelligence: A survey of model classiﬁcation and applications 5

===== PAGE 6 =====
the search space following the best performance of its own and
its neighbors, will be introduced. The mechanism of PSO is
derived from the self-driven particle models, i.e., by simulating
interactions among individuals within the population to opti-
mize the problem. To some extent, PSO can be considered as
a particular instance of self-driven particle models primarily
used for optimization problems. On the other hand, self-
driven particle models are more versatile and applied to simu-
late various self-driven systems and complex dynamic systems.
PSO was proposed by Kennedy and Eberhart
77 in 1995. In
PSO, particles are updated iteratively by adjusting their veloc-
ity based on their own best position and the best position of
their neighbors:
v
tþ1
i;d ¼ xvt
i;d þ c1r1ðpbesti;d /C0 xt
i;dÞþ c2r2ðgbestd /C0 xt
i;dÞð 6Þ
where vtþ1
i;d represents the updated velocity of the i- th particle
in the d- th dimension; xt
i;d represents the position of the i-t h
particle in the d- th dimension; pbesti;d represents the best posi-
tion of the i- th particle in the d- th dimension; gbestd repre-
sents the best position of all particles in the d- th dimension;
x is the inertia weight that controls the inertia of particle
velocity; c1 and c2 are the learning factors that control the
inﬂuence of particle’s own and global best solutions; r1 and
r2 are randomly generated values within the range ½0; 1/C138 that
are used to increase the randomness and diversity of the
search.
In PSO, each particle maintains its current position and
velocity, and continuously updates them to search for the opti-
mal solution. The values of inertia weight, learning factors and
random numbers in the velocity update formula need to be
adjusted based on the speciﬁc problem. The pseudocode is
shown as Algorithm 1,
Algorithm 1.Algorithm 1 PSO
1. for each particle i
2. Initialize velocity vi and position xi for particle i
3. Evaluate particle i and set pBesti = xi
4. end for
5. gBest = min ( pBesti)
6. while not stop
7. for i =1t o N
8. Update the velocity and position of particle i
9. Evaluate particle i
10. if ﬁt( x
i) < ﬁt( pBesti)
11. pBesti = xi;
12. if ﬁt( pBesti) < ﬁt( gBest)
13. gBest = pBesti;
14. end for
15. end while
16. print gBest
where N denotes the number of particles, pbesti denotes the
best solution of each particle, gBest denotes the global best
solution, and ﬁt represents ﬁtness.
There are many enhancement approaches for the PSO algo-
rithm structure, which can be classiﬁed into 10 main subsec-
tions shown in Table 1 ,
78–88 where the approaches in the ﬁrst
column represent the modifying method and the purpose in
the second column clariﬁes the desired performance of the
modiﬁed PSO.
3.3. Application of self-driven particle models
The main idea of self-driven particle models is to realize the
control of collective behavior by using simple local interaction
rules. Its simplicity and universality have attracted many
researchers to study its application. Self-driven particle models
have been widely used in the ﬁelds of robotics,
89 artiﬁcial intel-
ligence,62 complex systems 63 and control systems. 64 Then, we
are focusing on multi-agent swarm control and the application
of PSO, which can directly reﬂect the intrinsic idea embedded
within the models.
3.3.1. Multi-agent swarm control
Multi-agent swarm control i s to design the optimization
algorithms to drive the behavior of a group of agents, called
a swarm, to achieve a speciﬁc goal. Because of the simplicity
of the three roles of the Boids model and the similarity
between the swarm of animals and the multi-agent swarm,
it has a wide range of applicati ons in multi-agent swarm con-
trol.
90,91 In Ref. 92, the Boids model was used to character
the behavior of the agents in the swarm. Speciﬁcally, the
movement vectors corresponding to the repulsion and attrac-
tion force in the Boids model were used to design the move-
ment algorithm of the shepherd, which exerts repulsive
forces on the agents in the swarm to achieve spatial separa-
tion of a speciﬁed target agent from all the other agents,
while maintaining the connectiv ity among the other agents.
Figs. 5 (a)–(d)
92 shows that a target sheep loses all the con-
nections to the other sheep under the control of the
shepherd.
Based on the swarm model, the interaction between an
evolving swarm of birds and an environmental feedback con-
troller using a simulation model was studied in Ref. 93. The
simulation involves a ﬂock of birds with localized energy
sources that provide birds with the energy necessary for their
survival. The model incorporates natural selection through
an energy system in which birds die and are replaced by the
offspring of the remaining population. Behaviors of agents
evolve over successive generations to favor the most successful.
However, due to the unicity of swarm model, the application
of it in swarm control is not extensive.
The R-A model has a wide range of applications in multi-
agent swarm control, particularly in ﬂocking control, a subset
of swarm control. It focuses on the behavior of a group of agents
that move together in a self-organizing fashion, similar to the
behavior of ﬂocks of birds or schools of ﬁsh. In Ref. 94,t h e
authors proposed a modiﬁed version of the R-A model based
on fuzzy rules. The modiﬁed model improves the convergence
probability and relative converging size of the ﬂocking behavior.
By inferring the R-A model, the researchers have developed a
scheme for autonomous artiﬁcial agents to extract knowledge
about the interactions within a swarm of interest.
95 They have
done this by inﬁltrating the swarm of interest with a monitoring
robot and constantly measuring the distance between the inﬁltra-
tor and its nearest neighbor, which allows them to estimate the
6 C. WANG et al.

===== PAGE 7 =====
repulsion radius of the swarm age nts. This inferred model could
then be used to control these swarms, for example, to guide them
to safe areas. However, it is important to note that this method is
limited to a speciﬁc model of interaction.
To achieve accurate UAV swarm navigation when only one
UAV has predetermined path information, Tang proposed an
improved Vicsek model with hierarchical weighting in Ref. 96.
In Ref. 97, the Vicsek model has been used to analyze the
behavior of swarm robots and establish a model of swarm
robot synchronization. Self-organization regulations were pro-
posed to achieve ﬂock centering, direction coincidence, and
collision avoidance. The simulation experiments showed that
the proposed strategy can achieve swarm robot
synchronization.
The thought of local interaction in self-driven particle
models promotes the research i n multi-agent swarm control.
Berlinger et al.
98 demonstrated 3D collective behaviors with
a swarm of ﬁsh-inspired mini ature underwater robots that
use only local interaction. Fig. 6 98 demonstrates self-
organization in space with (A) a shoal of surgeonﬁsh forag-
i n gi nar e e fa n d( B )ad i s p e r s e db l a c kr o b o tm a k i n gi t sn e x t
move (black vector) based on a weighted average of attrac-
tive (blue) and repulsive (red) forces from nearby robots.
(C) The inter-robot forces (red) are derived from the
Lennard- Jones potential (blue) with standard parameters
a ¼ 12 and b ¼ 6, and a tunable target distance d
t ¼ 2B L
(Body Length), which deﬁnes the robot density of the group.
The forces f depend on the distance d between robots: f ¼ 0
Table 1 Enhancement approaches for PSO algorithm structure.
Approach Purpose Reference
Incorporating the utilization of multi-sub-population
strategies
Enhancing diversity and search ability 79
Enhancing the selection strategy for particle learning objects Accelerating convergence velocity 80
Modifying particle’s update strategy Preventing entrapment in local optima and enhancing its capability
to navigate high-dimensional search space
81
Modifying velocity update strategy Preserving diversity for comprehensive global search 82
Adjusting the speed or position constraint method and
dynamically determining the search space
Dynamically determine the search space 83
Combining PSO with other search techniques Increasing the diversity and improving the local search ability 84
Improving for multi-modal problems Finding several better solutions 85
Keeping diversity of population Improving the global convergence speed 86
Discrete PSO algorithm Fitting discrete optimization domains 87
Multi-objective optimization PSO algorithm Fitting multi-object optimization problems 88
Fig. 5 A target sheep loses all connections to the other sheep under control from shepherd. 92
Swarm intelligence: A survey of model classiﬁcation and applications 7

===== PAGE 8 =====
when d ¼ dt, f /C28 0w h e n d /C28 dt (repulsive), and f > 0w h e n
d > dt (attractive). (D) shows dis persion (blue markers,
dt ¼ 2 BL) and aggregation (red markers, dt ¼ 0:75 BL) with
seven robots. (E) shows the volume of schools in two situa-
tions. Moreover, based on the di s t r i b u t i o ns t r a t e g yi nb i o t i c
populations, the synchronizati on in multi-agent systems, as a
part of swarm control, has been well developed. Ref. 99 over-
viewed the synchronization in multi-agent system
comprehensively.
3.3.2. Applications of PSO
PSO has been successfully applied to solve a wide range of
optimization problems in various ﬁelds, especially aerospace
area. This section focuses on its application in the aerospace
area, in which aircraft design and ﬂight control will be nar-
rated. In aircraft design, PSO can be used to optimize aerody-
namic performance, structural design and weight distribution
of the airplane to improve ﬂight efﬁciency and economy. For
example, PSO can be used to design the airfoil,
99 fuselage pro-
ﬁle100 and engine layout of anairplane. 101 Especially, In Ref.
102, a longitudinal parameter identiﬁcation procedure for a
small UAV through modiﬁed PSO was described. The useful-
ness of this method was demonstrated by experimental
validation.
In ﬂight control of the airplane, it can be applied to the
parameter adjustment of the ﬂight control system, such as
PID controller parameter optimization in the autopilot system.
Besides, it can also be used to complete active disturbance
rejection control for aircraft anti-skid braking systems. In
Ref. 103, an improved version of PSO algorithm was used to
adjust the parameters of the anti-skid braking active distur-
bance rejection controller, which helps to improve the perfor-
mance and safety of the aircraft braking system. In addition to
the above applications, various applications of PSO can be
found in Ref. 78, which is a comprehensive review of PSO.
3.4. Evaluation of self-driven particle models
There is no doubt that the self-driven particle models achieve
the description of SI through simple local control rules. At pre-
sent, most of the self-driven particle models focus on the study
of the same population of organisms, and there are few studies
on heterogeneous populations. It is a feasible method to model
the collective behavior of heterogeneous populations by setting
different types of particles in the system to simulate the collec-
tive behavior of different populations. Therefore, the future
research direction of self-driven particle models should focus
on the research of heterogeneous population collective
behavior models. Additionally, these models are also unau-
thentic and cannot character some more basic collective behav-
iors of organisms in nature because they are too simplistic, for
example, how ant colonies move food. There is, however, a
type of model that does a good job of explaining the mecha-
nism of SI of ant colonies and other similar animals. These
models model a remarkable feature of these animals: they all
release pheromones for group communication when they
cluster.
4. Pheromone communication models
Pheromone communication models are a type of model used to
explain the speciﬁc interaction patterns within certain biologi-
cal clusters, in which individuals communicate with each other
through pheromones unique to the species. It should be noted
that this differs from the Physics-Chemistry-Mathematics-bas
ed (PCM) algorithms, which typically rely on mathematical,
physical, or chemical principles to solve problems or model
natural systems. Pheromone communication models, on the
other hand, are based on the concept of pheromone communi-
cation. There are many pheromone communication models,
such as ant colony models
19 in which ants ﬁnd the best path
through pheromone communication, bee colony models 104 in
which worker bees guide other bees to ﬁnd nectar sources
through pheromone communication, and bacteria foraging
models
34 in which coordination in the search process is
achieved through pheromone communication. For the sake
of brevity, this article focuses on representative models of
pheromones in ant colonies.
4.1. Typical pheromone communication models
4.1.1. Ant colony path optimization model based on pheromone
The research on ant colony collective behavior started from
human observation that ants can always ﬁnd the shortest path
Fig. 6 Self-organization in space. 98
8 C. WANG et al.

===== PAGE 9 =====
when transporting food. Through the observation of ants
transporting food, people found that ants would leave
pheromones on the path, but it was not clear how ants ﬁnd
the shortest path mechanism. In 1989, by designing a simple
experiment, Goss et al.
19 studied the mechanism of ant colony
to ﬁnd the shortest path through collective cooperation, and
established model to explain the mechanism of ant colony to
ﬁnd the shortest path. In this model, ants pass the path shown
in Fig. 7
19 every second from each direction and place one
pheromone unit in each direction. When a choice point
j ¼ 1; 2 is reached in the model, each ant takes a long or short
path with a probability of Pl;j and Ps;j, respectively, depending
on the pheromone content Sj and Lj of the two branches of the
choice point and then adds a pheromone to the chosen branch.
Based on their average speed and the length of the short
branch, those ants that choose the short branch at j ¼ 1 (or
2) will arrive at the opposite choice point j ¼ 2 (or 1) about sec-
onds later, and add pheromones there. Those who chose the
long branch would do the same thing 20 r seconds later, where
r is the ratio of the length of the long branch to the length of
the short branch. The timescales of these experiments were on
the order of magnitude of the average life span of the
pheromone,
20 to avoid the error caused by the evaporation
of the pheromone.
Therefore, at time t, the average equations of the random
system are:
dSj
dt ¼ Ps;j0ðt /C0 20Þþ Ps;jðtÞ; j ¼ 1; j0¼ 2o r j ¼ 2; j0¼ 1Þð 7Þ
dLj
dt ¼ Pl;j0ðt /C0 20rÞþ Pl;jðtÞ; j ¼ 1; j0¼ 2o r j ¼ 2; j0¼ 1 ð8Þ
Ps;j ¼ ð20 þ SjÞ2
ð20 þ SjÞ2 þð 20 þ LjÞ2 ; Ps;j þ Pl;j ¼ 1 ð9Þ
where Eq. (9) is the selection function obtained according to
the experiment in Ref. 21. As the path would increase gradu-
ally with time, it was concluded that the ant’s shortest
path-ﬁnding method is closely related to the pheromone. The
model is a random system model, which accurately quantiﬁes
the pheromone and makes the ant’s choice probabilistic.
Moreover, the model’s explanation of the ant’s ﬁnding the
optimal path is highly consistent with the observed phe-
nomenon, which is a simple but effective model.
4.1.2. Inﬂuence of parameters on pheromone communication
model
The foregoing model has fully revealed a mechanism of ants
choosing the shortest path, which is the result of the continu-
ous synergistic action of ant colonies. Every ant chooses differ-
ent branches according to the concentration of pheromones,
and at the same time leaves new pheromones for the next indi-
vidual to recognize. In this way, there is a circular interaction
between the groups, forming a positive feedback effect between
the groups, and ﬁnally enabling the ant colony to carry food
along a shorter path. This simple but effective collective behav-
ior is so impressive that many researchers have been devoted in
this study to reveal the mechanism of ant colony collective
behavior, and to study the inﬂuence of speciﬁc parameters in
the model.
Focusing on the transition between colony foraging and
solitary foraging, a track-tracking model that combines biolog-
ical parameters associated with organisms, tracking markers,
and populations was established in Ref. 105. Ordinary differ-
ential equations relate to the density of branches and the num-
ber of individuals tracked or randomly explored by track-
tracking. Models reveal that subtle changes in individual
behavior can lead to large differences in group behavior,
including the ability to switch from individual actions to orga-
nized collective behavior. Compared with the models in Ref.
19, this model paid more attention to the state transition of
individual ant colonies during the whole foraging process,
revealing the mechanism of food transport route selection of
ant colonies in more details. In Ref.
106–109, the spatial struc-
ture and colony behavior of ant colonies were simulated. In
some simulations, deposition and evaporation of pheromones
affect the ant’s local direction and speed of movement.
4.2. Ant colony optimization
The SI of ant colonies seeking the shortest path was cleverly
exploited by Dorigo.
110 Based on the mechanism of ﬁnding
the shortest path in ant colonies, he put forward the ACO,
which is the basis of the ant colony pheromone model that
can achieve a wide range of applications. Its pseudocode is
shown as Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2.Algorithm 2 ACO
1. Initialize ant colony
2. Initialize pheromone matrix
3. while (termination not met):
4. for each ant:
5. Choose next node
6. Update pheromone levels
7. end for
8. end while
Fig. 7 Experimental path of ant colony collective behavior. 19
Swarm intelligence: A survey of model classiﬁcation and applications 9

===== PAGE 10 =====
In line 5, the next node is chosen by
pij ¼ sijðtÞ
/C2/C3 k
/C2 gij
/C2/C3 n
P
k2allowed sikðtÞ½/C138 k /C2 gik½/C138 n ð10Þ
where pij represents the transition probability from node i to
node j; sijðtÞ represents the pheromone concentration on the
path from node i to node j at time t; gij represents the heuristic
information from node i to node j; k and n are the importance
factors of pheromone concentration and heuristic information,
respectively; Ji represents the set of all unvisited nodes. And at
line 6, pheromone levels are updated by
sijðt þ 1Þ¼ð 1 /C0 cÞ/C2 sijðtÞþ
Xm
k¼1
Dsk
ijðtÞð 11Þ
where c is the pheromone evaporation factor; Dsk
ijðtÞ is the
amount of pheromone released on the path by ant k at time t.
The essence of ACO is to realize the information interac-
tion between groups based on pheromone, and then complete
the search and optimization process. In the following period,
various improved algorithms appeared one after another,
which improved the theoretical research of ant colony algo-
rithm and promoted the corresponding application research,
including the typical Ant Colony System (ACS)
111,112 and
Max-Min Ant System (MMAS). 113,114 The related improved
algorithms are summarized in Table 2 ,66,67,113,115–121 where
TSP represents Traveling Salesman Problem.
4.3. Application of pheromone communication models
The main applications of pheromone communication models
are related to ACO. It is a powerful metaheuristic algorithm
inspired by the foraging behavior of ants. With further
research, it has been found that ACO has signiﬁcant advan-
tages in the ﬁeld of path planning and obstacle avoidance.
On the one hand, these problems themselves are high dimen-
sional, nonlinear, and highly complex problems, while ACO
has good search and optimization capabilities, making it
well-suited to solve these types of problems. On the other
hand, these problems also have important practical applica-
tions, such as autonomous driving, drone navigation, and
robot control, making research in these two application areas
of practical signiﬁcance. In this article, we will explore the
applications of ACO in path planning and obstacle avoidance.
ACO has been used for path planning and obstacle avoid-
ance, and has demonstrated effective performance in complex
and dynamic environments. For example, in Ref. 122,a n
improved ACO by introducing the yaw angle was used to gen-
erate a path for a UAV in low-altitude penetration. In another
study in Ref. 123, an improved ACO using the characteristics
of the A* algorithm and MMAS was applied to optimize the
path of a mobile robot to avoid obstacles in real time. To
improve the performance of ACO-based path planning and
obstacle avoidance, researchers have developed several tech-
niques, such as an adaptive heuristic function and hybrid algo-
rithms. An adaptive heuristic function has been proposed to
address issues like low search efﬁciency, slow convergence
speed, and getting stuck in the local optimum.
68 This function
updates heuristic information based on the shortest actual dis-
tance that an ant has traveled. Hybrid algorithms that combine
ACO with other optimization techniques were proposed to
improve the efﬁciency of the search process.
124
Despite the success of ACO-based approaches for path
planning and obstacle avoidance, there are several challenges
that must be addressed. One such challenge is dealing with
dynamic environments, where obstacles may appear or disap-
pear during the search process. To overcome this challenge,
researchers have proposed techniques such as dynamic phero-
mone updating
125 and moving obstacle avoidance. 126 Another
challenge is the need to balance exploration and exploitation
during the search process. To address this, researchers have
developed techniques such as multi-objective ACO 127 and par-
allel ACO. 128 Multi-objective optimization seeks to optimize
multiple objectives simultaneously, while parallel ACO dis-
tributes the search process among multiple agents to improve
efﬁciency.
In particular, the basic ACO does not include the part that
can make an agent avoid obstacles, so we summarized the
related modifying method of ACO to avoid obstacles. The
main method is combining ACO with other strategy. For
example, in Ref. 129, a dynamic path planning algorithm,
achieving collision avoidance through fuzzy logic control,
was proposed. This algorithm enhances the ant colony sys-
tem’s pheromone update mechanism using a sigmoid gain
function for efﬁcient exploitation during path planning. In
Ref. 130, a time taboo-based occupancy grid prediction model
for handling unknown time-varying dynamic obstacles was
proposed, which establishes an ant colony information inheri-
tance mechanism. Another effective method is adding the pen-
alty term in ﬁtness function or objective function for avoiding
obstacles, such as Ref. 131.
In summary, ACO is a promising approach for path plan-
ning and obstacle avoidance in robotics and autonomous sys-
tems. With the use of adaptive and hybrid algorithms, as well
as techniques for dealing with dynamic environments and bal-
ancing exploration and exploitation, ACO has the potential to
achieve efﬁcient and effective navigation in complex and
dynamic environments.
4.4. Evaluation of pheromone communication models
The SI model established based on pheromones fully demon-
strates that the collective behavior ability of a colony can be
hardwired to the components of the system, in which
hardwired refers to the real physical medium, pheromone,
Table 2 Overview of main ACO algorithms for NP-hard
problems.
ACO algorithm Reference Year TSP
Ant system 116 1991 Yes
Elitist AS 117 1992 Yes
Ant-Q 118 1995 Yes
Ant colony system 65 1996 Yes
MMAS 113 1996 Yes
Rank-based AS 66 1997 Yes
ANTS 119 1998 No
Best-worst AS 67 2000 Yes
Population-based ACO 120 2002 Yes
Beam-ACO 121 2004 No
10 C. WANG et al.

===== PAGE 11 =====
through which groups interact to realize the movement
between groups.
Pheromone communication models are close to nature. If
the main differential equation of pheromone communication
models is established properly, and the natural properties of
network structure, path size, individual heterogeneity and pop-
ulation are modeled carefully, the model will be more realistic
for simulating the collective behavior based on the pheromone.
Although the research on the pheromone communication
models has been relatively sound, in the speciﬁc application
ﬁeld, it mainly focuses on the ant colony pheromone model,
and there is a lack of application research on other SI models.
Therefore, the future development of pheromone communica-
tion models should focus on application and explore the appli-
cation ﬁelds of pheromone models outside ant colonies.
5. Leadership decision models
In some biological clusters, individuals interact with each other
not through distance rules but based on topological rules, such
as starling ﬂocks. In the actual study, the researchers found
that they interact not just based on topological rules, but also
based on hierarchies. For example, in ﬂying of starling ﬂocks,
they arrange themselves in different formations, and individu-
als in different positions in the formation have different hierar-
chies. In fact, hierarchies exist not only among groups of birds,
but also among groups of other organisms, such as wolves,
baboons, and sheep. Because of the existence of leadership
mechanism, the interaction and decision-making between
groups are no longer based on simple topology or distance
rules. Therefore, if the established model can simulate and
explain the collective behavior of these groups well, it is neces-
sary to establish a model based on the leadership and decision-
making mechanism, and it is particularly important to discover
the leadership and decision-making mechanism among biolog-
ical clusters.
5.1. Typical leadership decision models
Group decision-making is a complex and varied process, with
information sharing ranging from total openness to complete
secrecy. Figuring out exactly how this process works can be
tough, but it’s crucial to understand how groups make deci-
sions based on their leadership structures.
132 Which part of
the group or which individual is the leader needs to be deﬁned.
Only by ﬁnding the leader can we study the decision-making
process. However, the deﬁnition of a leader generally uses
the feature of inﬂuence. If an individual’s behavior causes cer-
tain behavior changes in other individuals in the group, this
individual has inﬂuence; if an individual has repeated inﬂuence
on the behavior of other individuals, whether directly or indi-
rectly caused by the hierarchy, this individual will become a
leader.
133
Based on the deﬁnition of a leader, the researchers studied
the internal information transfer mechanism and decision-
making mechanism when a group performs collective behav-
ior. In Ref. 134, Global Position System (GPS) was used to
acquire 3D data, the leader–follower hierarchy model of
pigeon ﬂocks was studied, and the hierarchy dynamics model
of pigeon ﬂocks was established. Based on the Boids model,
the mechanism of information transfer and leadership
decision-making in the biota were studied in Ref. 135. The
model showed that effective information transfer and
decision-making can occur in animal groups without a clear
signal or information transfer mechanism. It has been demon-
strated in Ref. 136, both theoretically and experimentally, that
in many cases an opinionated minority of individuals can
determine group selection, but the presence of ignorant indi-
viduals will spontaneously inhibit this process, returning con-
trol to the numerical majority group of individuals. The
results highlight the role of ignorant individuals in achieving
democratic consensus in situations of internal group conﬂict
and information constraints. The study in Ref. 137 tracked
wild baboons with high-resolution global positioning systems
and analyzed their relative movements to each other, revealing
a process of shared decision-making that governs baboon
movements. Rather than preferentially following the dominant
individual, baboons are more likely to follow multiple initia-
tors. When there was a conﬂict in the direction of movement,
the baboons would choose the direction with the greater angle,
but they would compromise if the angle was smaller. These
results are consistent with models of collective movement, sug-
gesting that democratic collective behavior that emerges from
simple rules is universal, even in complex, socially stratiﬁed
societies, which likewise validates the theory in Ref. 137. Thus,
an individual with a wide range of social connections is more
likely to inﬂuence group decision-making. Instead, in some
cases, inﬂuence may be a byproduct of social connections
rather than a direct consequence.
Since most animals have visual senses, the communication
process of decision-making can also be based on it. It was sug-
gested that an individual’s motor decisions are explicitly based
on the sensory information available to the organism in Ref.
138. In other words, they argued that while spatial relation-
ships do affect interactions between individuals, they do so
indirectly through the individual’s detection of sensory cues.
In the experiment, they used the data to reconstruct the visual
ﬁeld of each individual, based on which they analyzed the
information transmission mechanism and decision-making
mechanism of ﬁsh shoals, and explicitly considered that visual
perception could more accurately predict the propagation pro-
cess of behavioral change in groups with a leadership hierar-
chy. Based on the assumption of visual perception,
Rosenthal et al.
139 studied the hidden information transmis-
sion networks in the group, revealed the nature of decision
transmission, complex and local, by studying these interactive
networks, and determined that individuals with relatively few
but closely connected neighbors are both the most socially
inﬂuential and the most vulnerable to social inﬂuence.
5.2. Summary of leadership decision models building methods
The determination of leaders and the decision-making process
depends on the inﬂuence of individuals on individuals and the
inﬂuence of individuals on the group. A methodological frame-
work for group leadership decision-making mechanisms based
on inﬂuence research was proposed in Ref. 133, which is used
to guide the acquisition and interpretation of experimental
data. The framework can be divided into three steps. The ﬁrst
step, which identiﬁes the situations in which individuals exert
inﬂuence over the rest of the individuals in one instance, can
be divided into two small steps. First, the level of individual-
Swarm intelligence: A survey of model classiﬁcation and applications 11

===== PAGE 12 =====
to-individual inﬂuence can be studied, i.e., who inﬂuences
whom in a given group decision-making process, and the
potential strength of these inﬂuences; second, the impact of
individuals on the group level is studied, i.e., quantify the over-
all impact of individuals on the group level. The second step,
quantifying the overall impact, is to summarize the impact of
the ﬁrst step through repeated events and quantify the impact
of the individual on multiple group decisions. The third step,
judging the consistency of the inﬂuence, is to determine
whether the inﬂuence of an individual on other individuals in
the group varies over time or with the decision event.
With the development of computer technology and track-
ing techniques, methods of inferring inﬂuence have also been
adequately developed. Speciﬁcally, these methods can be used
to sort out the methodological framework of group leadership
decision-making mechanism based on inﬂuence research,
which can be summarized as the methods of inferring the
individual-to-individual inﬂuence in an instance and the
individual-to-group inﬂuence based on observed data, the
methods of inferring the overall inﬂuence, and the methods
of assessing the consistency of inﬂuence. The above methods
and their advantages and disadvantages are summarized in
Tables 3–5 .
69,70,140–149
5.3. Application of leadership decision models
This biological cluster with leadership level has a strict hierar-
chical distribution when producing collective behavior, so the
establishment of the model is also carried out around the dis-
covery of the leader in the group. The above framework com-
pletely describes the basic modeling idea for the behavior of an
organism cluster with a leadership decision-making mecha-
nism. Through a variety of model studies, people have become
more and more clear about the leadership decision-making
mechanism of SI, and many application examples based on
this have been produced.
The application of the leadership decision models is mainly
realized by the leader–follower strategy. Because the leadership
decision models are based on the formation phenomenon of
birds and other biological clusters in motion, the leader–fol-
lower strategy is mainly used in formation control.
In formation control, the basic structure of leader–follower
strategy includes the leader and the follower, and the leader is
responsible for planning and compiling the team line, where
the follower maintains an ideal formation by controlling their
position relative to the leader.
150 In Ref. 151, an improved lea-
der–follower formation control algorithm combined with Kal-
Table 3 Methods for inferring inﬂuence of individuals on individuals and groups.
Method of inferring eﬀect in
instance
Advantage Disadvantage Reference
Spatial location inference
method
Can be directly assessed directly through
observation
Assumptions may be invalid. 140
Initiator-follower identiﬁcation
method
Broad applicability Inapplicable when individual distances change 141
Delay time inference method Robust scalability Unsuitable for non-sustained movement 142
Entropy measures A solid and widely applicable theoretical
foundation
Lacking a basic model when the interpretation
is low
143
Decision result regression
method
It is both explanatory and easy to analyze Inapplicable without knowledge of individual
preferences
144
Table 4 Methods of inferring aggregate impact.
Method of inferring aggregate
eﬀect
Advantage Disadvantage Reference
Inﬂuence Elo method Wide applicability Results lack signiﬁcance with a large number 145
Social network inference method User-friendly operation Overall situation comprehension is
challenging
146
Maximum entropy model method Suitable for groups with large datasets Computationally burdensome 69
Model ﬁtting method Applicable at both individual and group
levels
Ensuring biological eﬀectiveness is diﬃcult 147
Table 5 Impact conformance assessment methods.
Method of assessing impact conformance Advantage Disadvantage Reference
Standard index method Broad applicability to independent data Inapplicable to non-independent data 70
Randomity-based modeling Suitable for non-independent data Prone to dimensional disasters 148
Mantel test method Facilitate hypothesis testing Lack consideration of spatial
autocorrelation
149
Coarse-grained evaluation method Easy to analyze and manipulate Result in low accuracy 142
12 C. WANG et al.

===== PAGE 13 =====
man Filtering was proposed to address the problem of multi-
robot formation control. The algorithm introduces virtual
robots to assist in the formation and transformation of
multi-robot and uses laser radar for planning and controlling.
The leader robot acts as a reference point to guide the forma-
tion, while the following robot moves to the target through the
guidance of the virtual navigator, forming the expected combi-
nation structure.
The leader–follower strategy was also used to realize forma-
tion control of UAVs.
152 Yang et al. 71 proposed a trajectory
tracking control method for leader–follower quadrotor UAV
formation, addressing the challenges of external disturbance,
uncertain aerodynamic parameters, and collisions among for-
mations. The control strategy utilizes a backstepping adaptive
control approach for the leader UAV and formation sliding
mode control for the follower UAVs. The effectiveness of
the proposed method is demonstrated through simulation
and experimental platforms, showcasing its potential for
real-world applications in coordinated ﬂight. The study in
Ref. 153 addressed the problem that the number of leaders
in a given position is not signiﬁcant to determine the follower
position in the traditional leader–follower strategy. Based on
the motion vector information, the leader–follower strategy
was improved to solve this problem.
Since the formation control is generally transformed into a
consensus control problem, the leader–follower strategy is also
used for multi-agent consensus control. In terms of multi-agent
consensus control, the leader is usually independent of the fol-
lowers, but it will have an impact on the followers. At this
time, all the agents can be controlled as long as the state of
the leader is controlled. In the realization of multi-agent con-
sensus control with leader–follower strategy, the difﬁculty lies
in the fact that not all followers can directly communicate with
the leader. Based on the methods to deal with this difﬁculty,
the existing researches on leader–follower consensus control
can be roughly divided into three categories:
154
(1) The leader’s behavior is determined by a dynamic node
that is similar to a follower with zero or known
input.155–159
(2) Assume that the desired reference locus is linearly
parameterized, and then all subsystems know the basis
function vector. 160
(3) Refer to the time-varying distributed control method
using a non-smooth sign function, but it is not ideal
due to the chattering phenomenon. 161
The research in Ref. 154, aimed at the consensus problem,
successfully relaxed the previous requirement that the leader’s
trajectory be linearly parameterized with some known func-
tions, that is, relaxed the type (2) hypothesis above. In addi-
tion, the consistency problem of multi-agent systems with
leaders under two conditions of ﬁxed topology and switching
topology was studied in Ref. 162, while the leader–follower
consensus problem of multi-agent systems with invariant linear
multi-agent systems at ﬁnite data rates was studied in Ref. 154.
In short, the application of the leadership decision models
does not directly apply the mechanism similar to the SI, but
realizes the speciﬁc application based on the idea in it, that
is, to realize the overall control of the group behavior by con-
trolling the behavior of a part of individuals. When the model
is applied to the actual robot crowd, UAV swarm and
unmanned boat swarm, it can usually play a role in reducing
the communication consumption and control cost.
5.4. Evaluation of leadership decision models
The leadership decision models are established based on the
hierarchical mechanism between biological clusters. The lead-
ership hierarchy and decision-making process within the group
are studied according to the hierarchical mechanism. Most of
these models are built on the basis of experimental data, so
the effect of the models is more realistic, and at the application
level also has a very considerable development prospect. The
future research direction should focus on applying the leader-
ship decision mechanism existing in biological clusters to the
decision planning of unmanned systems.
6. Empirical research models
The self-driven particle models are rule-based models, while
the pheromone communication models are medium-based
models. However, due to the relative underdevelopment of
technology, the establishment of these two models lack empir-
ical research to verify, and the rationality of their models is not
convincing to some extent. However, since the development of
advanced testing methods such as camera technology and laser
radar, researchers have had the conditions for the empirical
study of biological cluster behavior, and thus the SI has been
studied at a deeper level. The establishment process of the lead-
ership decision models above is actually similar to empirical
research models, which require data-based modeling and anal-
ysis, involving the steps of data collection, data processing,
model establishment, and model veriﬁcation, but the analysis
focuses on ﬁnding the formation mechanism of the leading
decision in the group. What is introduced in this section is
empirical research models except the leadership decision mod-
els. In fact, it is a kind of model based on advanced testing
means and established through investigation. The ant colony
model introduced above also relies on part of experimental
data in the establishment process, but the difﬁculty of data col-
lection and analysis is relatively low and does not involve the
measurement of relative distance and the processing of com-
plex data. Moreover, the experiment is artiﬁcially designed
and does not occur naturally in biological clusters, so it is
not the focus discussed in this section. This section mainly dis-
cusses models related to the behavior of biological clusters,
which are relatively difﬁcult to measure and calculate with
actual data.
6.1. Overview of empirical research models
6.1.1. Small-scale cluster empirical research models
Since the model is established based on empirical research, the
spatial structure it considers must be real 3D space. As long as
the method adopted can observe and measure the research
object in an all-round way and the data processing scale is
within the feasibility, the empirical study of 3D biological clus-
ter can be realized. To obtain 3D data, the simplest way is to
use photography technology to obtain the relative position and
relative distance of objects, and then use the actual acquired
data for analysis and research. For example, the study on
the 3D structure of ﬁsh shoals in Ref. 163 is a landmark study
Swarm intelligence: A survey of model classiﬁcation and applications 13

===== PAGE 14 =====
on 3D biological clusters. In the study process, the author cre-
ated the 3D method and the shadow method to measure the
three-dimensional distance, which set a precedent for empirical
research on 3D biological clusters. Ref. 164 quantiﬁed the
three-dimensional trajectory of 8 ﬁsh using stereo photography
and a computer tracking algorithm and compared the polarity,
velocity, and average nearest distance of a real shoal with a
simulated model. In Ref. 24, video recording and image digiti-
zation techniques were used to observe ﬁsh shoals, and evi-
dence of attractive and repulsive regions was found. In
addition, three novel group structure features were also found,
and the nearest neighbor rule model of the self-driven particle
models was veriﬁed by the empirical study.
6.1.2. Large-scale cluster empirical research models
Foregoing models are all research based on the data obtained
from experiments. Some of them not only verify the rationality
of the attraction and exclusion rules in the self-driven particle
models but also discover new group structure characteristics in
SI, which greatly promotes the development of the research on
SI. However, the above-mentioned three models target a small
population size, the number of individuals only maintained at
around 10, and the conclusions obtained are not necessarily
applicable to large-scale groups. This is because the proportion
of individuals in the periphery of a large group is signiﬁcantly
lower than that in the center, but this does not happen in small
groups. Therefore, for large groups, this marginal phe-
nomenon is signiﬁcant to cause the interaction rules of the
group to be inconsistent with the three principles of the self-
driven particle models. Therefore, new methods and tech-
niques are needed to study the behavior of large-scale biolog-
ical clusters.
By recording the whole process of SI of the population with
the camera, and analyzing the recorded data later, the model
established will have a higher similarity to the real collective
behavior of organisms. Photos of hundreds of starlings during
migration have been taken using high-speed cameras in Ref.
23. After analyzing the data in the photos, a topological rule
model of starlings was established. This overturns the previous
distance measurement rules, and the conclusion shows that the
interaction between starlings is not based on distance range,
but based on topological rules, and the speciﬁc number of
interacting neighbors is 6–7 starlings around each individual.
The study in Ref. 165 used a maximum entropy model to ana-
lyze starling ﬂock data. The study found that local, paired
interactions between birds were signiﬁcant to predict the
ﬂock’s order spread, and the number of interacting neighbors
did not depend on population density. This supports the idea
that interactions are determined by topological distance rather
than physical distance. Ref. 166 reported a study on a large
ﬂock of starlings, which found that changes in the behavior
of one bird affected the behavior of all other birds in the ﬂock,
regardless of ﬂock size. This scale-free behavioral correlation
suggests the ﬂock is a critical system with a limit to its response
to environmental disturbances.
The work in Refs. 23 and 166 actually relied on a project
called STARFLAG, which studies the collective behavior of
large clusters of organisms. The main technical issues in the
collection of 3D data for large animal populations were
reviewed in Ref. 167. In particular, it explains how to solve
the stereoscopic matching problem, which has been a major
bottleneck in all past 3D studies. It also shows how to avoid
the pitfalls most common in the quantitative analysis of 3D
animal populations, paying particular attention to the problem
of bias introduced by the boundaries of a population, and
illustrating by example the problem of artifacts resulting from
ignoring boundary effects when studying the 3D structure of a
population. In the course of the STARFLAG project, some
methods are provided for studying the behavior of large clus-
ters of organisms, and the boundary effect of the mentioned
large clusters relative to small clusters is also taken into
account in the study, and the results show that its inﬂuence
on the behavior of biological clusters is signiﬁcant.
6.2. Summary of methods for building empirical research models
New tracking techniques have made it much easier to collect
data, and vast datasets have been uploaded to the Internet
for researchers to use. The immediate problem is how to use
such large data sets to construct more accurate models. Typi-
cal approaches to solve this problem are the Force Map and
data-driven modeling methods.
Since the collected data sets are generally trajectory data
about time series, which contains the movement direction
and spatial position of individuals at a certain moment. The
time difference method can be used to infer the movement
speed, acceleration, relative position, and relative direction of
individuals at a certain moment. For groups, the aggregation
density and degree of polarization between groups can be
counted to further infer the interaction force between individ-
uals in the group. Force Map is a method for directly inferring
the interaction forces between individuals from experimental
data.
168,169 This method forms variable space with variables
such as relative position and the relative direction of move-
ment between individuals. By drawing the distribution of
acceleration and angular acceleration in it, it can infer what
kind of social force exists between individuals, and analyze
the relationship between social force and relative motion state.
In Ref. 147, Force Map was applied to analyze the trajectory
data of golden shiners, and it was found that the social forces
between individuals showed the effects of repulsion and attrac-
tion, and the directional alignment was the result of both
effects. At the same time, the social forces from multiple neigh-
bors did not act on individuals in an average manner.
The Force Map method can infer the social forces according
to the trajectory, which is similar to the self-driven particle
models, but it is actually verifying the rationality of some rules
in the self-driven particle. Although simple in nature, it is at the
cost of sacriﬁcing important constraints and oversimpliﬁcation.
Four of its most critical constraints were summarized in Ref.
170. In order to overcome the limitations of the Force Map
method, a data-driven modeling approach was proposed in
Ref. 170, which can quantify and map the interaction between
two individuals, describe how the strength of these interactions
varies as a function of individual state variables, reconstruct the
interaction function, and derive a clear and concise mathemat-
ical model to reproduce the observed behavior.
6.3. Application of empirical research models
As mentioned above, the key step of empirical research lies in
the collection of data, which is most notably reﬂected in the
14 C. WANG et al.

===== PAGE 15 =====
data-driven model. The data- driven model not only veriﬁes
the correctness of the rules of the self-driven particle models,
but also studies a new SI model on this basis. Nevertheless,
the key role of empirical research models is to verify the cor-
rectness of the previously established models, referring to the
self-driven particle model and other models based on observa-
tion and simulation. Therefore, the application of the empiri-
cal research models is mainly reﬂected in the application of
its research idea, that is, the modeling and prediction of group
behavior based on a large number of experimental data, or in
other words, the data-driven application research.
6.3.1. Trajectory tracking in dense crowd based on data-driven
method
The application of the data-driven method which is closely
related to the behavior of biological clustering is reﬂected in
the track tracking, among which the track of population trajec-
tory is the most important application. The tracking of crowd
trajectory here is for the consideration of public safety, which
refers to the tracking of crowd trajectory in large and dense
scenes. The tracking method is a tracking algorithm. The
designed track tracking algorithm and monitoring system were
used in Ref. 171 to realize track tracking for multiple individuals
in a crowd in a large and dense scene. The accuracy of many
pedestrian tracking algorithms is achieved by predicting pedes-
trian tracks through crowd motion models. A crowd motion
model based on the local crowd motion modes in intensive videos
was pro- posed in Ref. 172. This model encodes the time evolu-
tion of local motion modes represented by directional statistical
distribution and then uses this model to estimate the expected
movement of pedestrians at each spatiotemporal position, thus
achieving a visual measurement of pedestrian efﬁciency, and
using this pedestrian efﬁciency to detect abnormal events and
track individuals in crowded scenes. The crowd motion tracking
algorithm proposed in Ref. 173 is driven by prior behaviors,
which are learned from a large number of crowd video databases
collected from the Internet. Different from Ref. 172, this algo-
rithm learns crowd motion mode s based on the extracted global
features. Fig. 8
173 shows the results of Ref. 173,w h e r e( a )i sa
busy airport scene, (b) is the Shibuya crosswalk, and (c) is a
two-way zebra crossing scene. Combining the multi-agent motion
model based on speed obstacle and high-deﬁnition crowd video
data set, a real-time tracking algorithm for crowd trajectory
tracking under medium density was proposed in Ref. 174.
6.3.2. Social network analysis
The empirical research models are computational models that
simulate the behavior of biological swarms and can be used to
analyze user behavior in social networks. In social network
analysis, the biological swarm empirical research models can
be used to simulate social interaction and information dissem-
ination characteristics of users.
For example, it can be used to study information dissemi-
nation in social networks. The model can simulate information
exchange between different users, as well as the speed and
scope of information dissemination. In this way, factors inﬂu-
encing information dissemination can be identiﬁed and the
most effective information dissemination strategies can be
determined.
Additionally, it can be used to analyze users’ social net-
works. By modeling the interactions and connections between
users, the relationships between different users in the social
network can be determined. These relationships can be used
to predict information dissemination and inﬂuence between
users. Focusing on identifying potential user groups that
may play a role in the propagation of misinformation and
information, Ref. 175 used K-means integrated with bio-
inspired algorithms to analyze 10,000 users and 555,684 tweets
to compute eighteen factors based on the tweet and user
parameters. Factor selection for the ﬁnal analysis identiﬁed
11 statistically relevant factors. In summary, the empirical
research models can provide valuable information in social
network analysis, helping us better understand and manage
user behavior in social networks.
6.4. Evaluation of empirical research models
The empirical research models have been veriﬁed through real-
world experiments, so compared with the self-driven particle
models and pheromone communication models, their authen-
ticity and accuracy are improved to an absolute degree, and
it is more convincing in revealing the mechanism of SI. As
can be seen from the above overview, the development of
empirical research models is actually closely related to the
development of data collection methods and data processing
techniques. Therefore, the future development of empirical
research models depends on the development of advanced data
collection and processing techniques. At present, the empirical
research models should be mainly developed with the new gen-
eration of large-scale data processing technology. For exam-
ple, deep learning is introduced into the model parameter
determination to realize the establishment of a large-scale col-
lective behavior model.
7. Conclusions
This article recalled SI models and applications. To provide a
thorough narrative of SI models, they were divided into four
categories: self-driven particle models, pheromone communi-
cation models, empirical research models and leadership deci-
sion models. The typical models and applications of each
category of models were reviewed. More speciﬁcally, PSO
and ASO were summarized in self-driven particle models and
Fig. 8 Testing videos along with manually annotated ground truth (yellow) and data-driven tracking results (red).
Swarm intelligence: A survey of model classiﬁcation and applications 15

===== PAGE 16 =====
pheromone communication models, respectively. Further-
more, the more precise and effective modeling techniques for
leadership decisions and empirical research models were
described.
The discovery of the mechanism requires rigorous model
support, and the model is based on the behavior characteristics
of different organisms and the common among the same spe-
cies of organisms. The existing SI models effectively capture
the characteristics of SI and can simulate the collective behav-
ior resembling real biological clusters. These models have
demonstrated strong performance at the simulation level. At
the level of algorithm, SI algorithms perform well in many
applications. However, they also have some limitations, such
as issues in stability, parameter tuning, stagnation, the sensitiv-
ity to the initial conditions and the dependency of the problem.
The issue of stability arises from the intricate dynamics of
interactions among individuals within the algorithm, leading
to unpredictable outcomes. Parameter tuning complexity stems
from the need to ﬁnd optimal conﬁgurations tailored to the
unique characteristics of each problem, making it a challenging
and problem-speciﬁc task. Stagnation poses a signiﬁcant hur-
dle, limiting the algorithm’s ability to explore and discover glo-
bal optima, particularly in complex scenarios. Sensitivity to
initial conditions further complicates matters, introducing an
element of unpredictability in the algorithm’s behavior. Addi-
tionally, problem dependency highlights the inconsistency in
performance across different types of problems, underscoring
the need for adaptive algorithms. Successfully addressing these
challenges requires not only a nuanced understanding of algo-
rithmic intricacies but also the ability to make domain-speciﬁc
adjustments enhance their robustness and effectiveness. Issues
in stability, parameter tuning and stagnation have been
addressed in Ref. 29, while further in-depth study is required
for the sensitivity to the initial conditions and the dependency
of the problem.
Furthermore, we found that there are still many challenges
in the study of SI models and applications need to be broken
down in the future, which are summarized as follows.
(1) Model accuracy evaluation system
With the improvement of data analysis technology, data-
driven research has become a hotspot in the study of SI. How-
ever, the main results of the research are still the simulation
veriﬁcation based on their own designed methods. There is a
lack of research on how to quantitatively evaluate the differ-
ences between the data driven results and the real collective
behavior of biological populations, and a standardized com-
prehensive evaluation system is a research direction.
(2) Application of heterogeneous populations
The SI has been widely used in intelligent unmanned sys-
tems. However, the research on cooperative operation of
heterogeneous populations is not efﬁcient enough to cope with
the current complex and changeable environment, and the
future research direction can be developed to multi-
population cooperative perception, information sharing, task
allocation, path planning, collaborative decision-making and
other aspects.
(3) Unmanned and manned cooperative cluster systems
The research on autonomous unmanned cluster systems has
been carried out in many countries, but the research on
unmanned and manned cooperative cluster systems is still in
the initial stage. It is a feasible research direction to integrate
the SI advantage with the system with human participation
in decision-making.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Chao WANG: Writing – original draft, Writing – review &
editing. Shuyuan ZHANG: Investigation, Writing – review &
editing. Tianhang MA: Investigation. Yuetong XIAO: Investi-
gation. Michael Zhiqiang CHEN: Supervision, Writing –
review & editing. Lei WANG: Funding acquisition, Supervi-
sion, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing
ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This study was co-supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 61873017) and the Academic Excel-
lence Foundation of Beihang University for PhD Students,
China.
References
1. Beni G, Wang J. Swarm intelligence in cellular robotic systems.
In: Robots and biological systems: Towards a new bionics?
Berlin: Springer; 1993. p. 703–12.
2. Khaldi B, Cherif F. An overview of swarm robotics: Swarm
intelligence applied to multi-robotics. Int J Comput Appl
2015;126(2):31–7.
3. Krause S, James R, Faria JJ, et al. Swarm intelligence in
humans: Diversity can trump ability. Anim Behav 2011;81
(5):941–8.
4. Duan H, Sun CH, Shi YH. Progress in swarm intelligence.
Communications of CAA2013;34(3):65–74.
5. Li P, Duan HB. Bio-inspired computation algorithms. In: Bio-
inspired computation in unmanned aerial vehicles . Berlin:
Springer; 2014. p. 35–69.
6. Jolles JW, Boogert NJ, Sridhar VH, et al. Consistent individual
differences drive collective behavior and group functioning of
schooling ﬁsh. Curr Biol2017;27(18):2862–8.
7. Marras S, Killen SS, Lindstro ¨ m J, et al. Fish swimming in
schools save energy regardless of their spatial position. Behav
Ecol Sociobiol2015;69:219–26.
8. Verma S, Novati G, Koumoutsakos P. Efﬁcient collective
swimming by harnessing vortices through deep reinforcement
learning. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA2018;115(23):5849–54.
16 C. WANG et al.

===== PAGE 17 =====
9. Bockoven AA, Wilder SM, Eubanks MD. Intraspeciﬁc
variation among social insect colonies: Persistent regional and
colony-level differences in ﬁre ant foraging behavior. PLoS One
2015;10(7):e0133868.
10. Friedman DA, Greene MJ, Gordon DM. The physiology of
forager hydration and variation among harvester ant
(Pogonomyrmex barbatus) colonies in collective foraging
behavior. Sci Rep2019;9:5126.
11. Kolay S, Boulay R, D’Ettorre P. Regulation of ant foraging: A
review of the role of information use and personality. Front
Psychol 2020;11:734.
12. Pimenta V, Barroso I, Boitani L, et al. Risks a la carte:
Modelling the occurrence and intensity of wolf predation on
multiple livestock species. Biol Conserv2018;228:331–42.
13.
/C23Akesson S, Helm B. Endogenous programs and ﬂexibility in
bird migration. Front Ecol Evol2020;8:78.
14. Duan HB, Li P. Autonomous control for unmanned aerial
vehicle swarms based on biological collective behaviors. Sci
Technol Rev2017;35(7):17–25 [Chinese] .
15. Reynolds CW. Flocks, herds and schools: A distributed
behavioral model. In: Proceedings of the 14th annual
conference on computer graphics and interactive techniques .
New York: ACM; 1987. p. 25–34.
16. Spector L, Klein J. Evolutionary dynamics discovered via
visualization in the breve simulation environment. In:
Workshop Proc. of ALife VIII.Sydney: UNSW Press; 2002. p.
163–70.
17. Couzin ID, Krause J, James R, et al. Collective memory and
spatial sorting in animal groups. J Theor Biol2002;218(1):1–11.
18. Vicsek T, Cziro ´ k A, Ben-Jacob E, et al. Novel type of phase
transition in a system of self-driven particles. Phys Rev Lett
1995;75(6):1226–9.
19. Goss S, Aron S, Deneubourg JL, et al. Self-organized shortcuts
in the Argentine ant. Naturwissenschaften 1989;76(12):579–81.
20. Van Vorhis Key SE, Baker TC. Trail-following responses of the
Argentine ant, Iridomyrmex humilis (Mayr), to a synthetic trail
pheromone component and analogs. J Chem Ecol 1982;8
(1):3–14.
21. Beckers R, Goss S, Deneubourg JL, et al. Colony size,
communication and ant foraging strategy. Psyche A J
Entomol 1989;96(3–4):239–56.
22. Karaboga D, Akay B. A comparative study of artiﬁcial bee
colony algorithm. Appl Math Comput2009;214(1):108–32.
23. Ballerini M, Cabibbo N, Candelier R, et al. Interaction ruling
animal collective behavior depends on topological rather than
metric distance: Evidence from a ﬁeld study. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2008;105(4):1232–7.
24. Tien JH, Levin SA, Rubenstein DI. Dynamics of ﬁsh shoals:
identifying key decision rules. Evol Ecol Res2004;6(4):555–65.
25. Ha S, Jeong H. Towards automated statistical physics: Data-
driven modeling of complex systems with deep learning. arXiv
preprint: 2001.02539; 2020.
26. Ha S, Jeong H. Unraveling hidden interactions in complex
systems with deep learning. Sci Rep2021;11(1):12804.
27. Guo WC, Ai BQ, He L. Reveal ﬂocking of birds ﬂying in fog by
machine learning. arXiv preprint: 2005.10505, 2020.
28. Tang J, Liu G, Pan QT. A review on representative swarm
intelligence algorithms for solving optimization problems:
Applications and trends. IEEE/CAA J Autom Sin 2021;8
(10):1627–43
.
29. Selvaraj S, Choi E. Survey of swarm intelligence algorithms. In:
Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on software
engineering and information management. New York: ACM;
2020. p. 69–73.
30. Gad AG. Particle swarm optimization algorithm and its
applications: a systematic review. Arch Comput Meth Eng
2022;29(5):2531–61.
31. Pourpanah F, Wang R, Lim CP, et al. A review of artiﬁcial ﬁsh
swarm algorithms: recent advances and applications. Artif Intell
Rev 2023;56(3):1867–903.
32. Rokbani N, Kumar R, Abraham A, et al. Bi-heuristic ant
colony optimization-based approaches for traveling salesman
problem. Soft Comput A Fusion Found Methodol Appl2021;25
(5):3775–94
.
33. Kaya E, Gorkemli B, Akay B, et al. A review on the studies
employing artiﬁcial bee colony algorithm to solve
combinatorial optimization problems. Eng Appl Artif Intell
2022;115:105311.
34. Guo C, Tang H, Niu B, et al. A survey of bacterial foraging
optimization. Neurocomputing 2021;452:728–46.
35. Chen X, Cheng F, Liu C, et al. An improved Wolf pack
algorithm for optimization problems: Design and evaluation.
PLoS One2021;16(8):e0254239.
36. Alazzam H, Sharieh A, Sabri KE. A feature selection algorithm
for intrusion detection system based on pigeon inspired
optimizer. Expert Syst Appl2020;148:113249.
37. Zhou XB, Ma HJ, Gu JG, et al. Parameter adaptation-based
ant colony optimization with dynamic hybrid mechanism. Eng
Appl Artif Intell2022;114:105139.
38. Mao WL, Hung CW, Huang HY. Modiﬁed PSO algorithm on
recurrent fuzzy neural network for system identiﬁcation. Intell
Autom Soft Comput2019;25(2):329–41.
39. Liu Y, Zhang XJ, Zhang Y, et al. Collision free 4D path
planning for multiple UAVs based on spatial reﬁned voting
mechanism and PSO approach. Chin J Aeronaut 2019;32
(6):1504–19
.
40. Chen JQ, Tang YF, Ge R, et al. Reliability design optimization
of composite structures based on PSO together with FEA. Chin
J Aeronaut2013;26(2):343–9.
41. Duan HB, Zhang DF. A binary tree based coordination scheme
for target enclosing with micro aerial vehicles. IEEE/ASME
Trans Mechatron2021;26(1):458–68.
42. Yu X, Xu X, Liu L, et al. Circular formation of networked
dynamic unicycles by a distributed dynamic control law.
Automatica 2018;89:1–7.
43. Yao WR, Chen Y, Tian HY, et al. Multi-UAV synchronous
approaching using homotopy-based trajectory planning. Guid
Navigat Control2022;2(2):2250012.
44. Feng Q, Hai XS, Sun B, et al. Resilience optimization for multi-
UAV formation reconﬁguration via enhanced pigeon-inspired
optimization. Chin J Aeronaut2022;35(1):110–23.
45. Liao F, Teo R, Wang JL, et al. Distributed formation and
reconﬁguration control of VTOL UAVs. IEEE Trans Contr
Syst Technol2017;25(1):270–7.
46. Chen L, Duan HB. Collision-free formation-containment
control for a group of UAVs with unknown disturbances.
Aerosp Sci Technol2022;126:107618.
47. Li SG, Batra R, Brown D, et al. Particle robotics based on
statistical mechanics of loosely coupled components. Nature
2019;567(7748):361–5.
48. Elege N, Solapurkar S, Joordens M. Eye sensor for swarm
robotic ﬁsh. In: 2017 12th system of systems engineering
conference (SoSE). Piscataway: IEEE Press; 2017. p. 1–6.
49. Yu JZ, Wang C, Xie GM. Coordination of multiple robotic ﬁsh
with applications to underwater robot competition. IEEE Trans
Ind Electron2016;63(2):1280–8.
50. Kaloop MR, Bardhan A, Kardani N, et al. Novel application
of adaptive swarm intelligence techniques coupled with
adaptive network-based fuzzy inference system in predicting
photovoltaic power. Renew Sustain Energy Rev
2021;148:111315.
51. Wei D, Wang ZB, Si L, et al. Preaching-inspired swarm
intelligence algorithm and its applications. Knowl Based Syst
2021;211:106552.
Swarm intelligence: A survey of model classiﬁcation and applications 17

===== PAGE 18 =====
52. Schranz M, Di Caro GA, Schmickl T, et al. Swarm Intelligence
and cyber-physical systems: Concepts, challenges and future
trends. Swarm Evol Comput2021;60:100762.
53. Ouellette NT. A physics perspective on collective animal
behavior. Phys Biol2022;19(2):021004.
54. Berdahl AM, Kao AB, Flack A, et al. Collective animal
navigation and migratory culture: from theoretical models to
empirical evidence. Phil Trans R Soc B 2018;373
(1746):20170009
.
55. Sun WF, Tang M, Zhang LJ, et al. A survey of using swarm
intelligence algorithms in IoT. Sensors 2020;20(5):1420.
56. Rostami M, Berahmand K, Nasiri E, et al. Review of swarm
intelligence-based feature selection methods. Eng Appl Artif
Intell 2021;100:104210.
57. Shaikh PW, El-Abd M, Khanafer M, et al. A review on swarm
intelligence and evolutionary algorithms for solving the trafﬁc
signal control problem. IEEE Trans Intell Transp Syst2022;23
(1):48–63
.
58. Zemmal N, Azizi N, Sellami M, et al. Particle swarm
optimization based swarm intelligence for active learning
improvement: application on medical data classiﬁcation. Cogn
Comput 2020;12(5):991–1010.
59. Topaz CM, Bertozzi AL. Swarming patterns in a two-
dimensional kinematic model for biological groups. SIAM J
Appl Math2004;65(1):152–74.
60. Vicsek T, Zafeiris A. Collective motion. Phys Rep2012;517(3–
4):71–140
.
61. Ouellette NT, Gordon DM. Goals and limitations of modeling
collective behavior in biological systems. Front Phys
2021;9:687823.
62. Krzywanski J. A general approach in optimization of heat
exchangers by bio-inspired artiﬁcial intelligence methods.
Energies 2019;12(23):4441.
63. Drozda M, Bate I, Timmis J. Bio-inspired error detection for
complex systems. In: 2011 IEEE 17th paciﬁc rim international
symposium on dependable computing.Piscataway: IEEE Press;
2011. p. 154–63.
64. Uleru GI, Hulea M, Burlacu A. Bio-inspired control system for
ﬁngers actuated by multiple SMA actuators. Biomimetics
2022;7(2):62.
65. Gambardella LM, Dorigo M. Solving symmetric and
asymmetric TSPs by ant colonies. In: Proceedings of IEEE
international conference on evolutionary computation.
Piscataway: IEEE Press; 2002. p. 622–7.
66. Bullnheimer B. A new rank based version of the ant system: a
computational study. Central Eur J Oper Res Econ
1999;7:25–38.
67. Cordon O, Fernandez I, Herrera F, et al. A new ACO model
integrating evolutionary computation concepts: the best-worst
ant system. Proc. ANTS2000;2000:22–9.
68. Zheng Y, Luo Q, Wang HB, et al. Path planning of mobile
robot based on adaptive ant colony algorithm. J Intell Fuzzy
Syst 2020;39(4):5329–38.
69. Katz Y, Tunstrøm K, Ioannou CC, et al. Inferring the structure
and dynamics of interactions in schooling ﬁsh. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA2011;108(46):18720–5.
70. Nakagawa S, Schielzeth H. Repeatability for Gaussian and
non-Gaussian data: a practical guide for biologists. Biol Rev
Camb Philos Soc2010;85(4):935–56.
71. Yang KB, Dong WH, Tong YY, et al. Leader-follower
formation consensus of quadrotor UAVs based on prescribed
performance adaptive constrained backstepping control. Int J
Contr Autom Syst2022;20(10):3138–54.
72. Gambardella LM, Dorigo M. Solving symmetric and
asymmetric TSPs by ant colonies. In: Proceedings of IEEE
international conference on evolutionary computation.
Piscataway: IEEE Press; 2002. p. 622–7.
73. Jadbabaie A, Lin J, Morse AS. Coordination of groups of
mobile autonomous agents using nearest neighbor rules. IEEE
Trans Autom Contr2003;48(6):988–1001.
74. Gre´ goire G, Chate´ H. Onset of collective and cohesive motion.
Phys Rev Lett2004;92(2):025702.
75. Go¨ nci B, Nagy M, Vicsek T. Phase transition in the scalar noise
model of collective motion in three dimensions. Eur Phys J Spec
Top 2008;157(1):53–9.
76. Chate´ H, Ginelli F, Gre´ goire G, et al. Collective motion of self-
propelled particles interacting without cohesion. Phys Rev E
2008;77(4):046113.
77. Kennedy J, Eberhart R. Particle swarm optimization.
Proceedings of ICNN’95 - International conference on neural
networks. Piscataway: IEEE Press; 2002. p. 1942–8 .
78. Wang DS, Tan DP, Liu L. Particle swarm optimization
algorithm: an overview. Soft Comput A Fusion Found
Methodol Appl2018;22(2):387–408.
79. Tanweer MR, Suresh S, Sundararajan N. Dynamic mentoring
and self-regulation based particle swarm optimization
algorithm for solving complex real-world optimization
problems. Inf Sci2016;326:1–24.
80. Leontitsis A, Kontogiorgos D, Pagge J. Repel the swarm to the
optimum! Appl Math Comput2006;173(1):265–72.
81. Tatsumi K, Ibuki T, Tanino T. A chaotic particle swarm
optimization exploiting a virtual quartic objective function
based on the personal and global best solutions. Appl Math
Comput 2013;219(17):8991–9011.
82. Ardizzon G, Cavazzini G, Pavesi G. Adaptive acceleration
coefﬁcients for a new search dive r s i ﬁ c a t i o ns t r a t e g yi np a r t i c l e
swarm optimization algorithms.Inf Sci Int J2015;299(C):337–78.
83. Barisal AK. Dynamic search space squeezing strategy based
intelligent algorithm solutions to economic dispatch with
multiple fuels. Int J Electr Power Energy Syst2013;45(1):50–9
.
84. Vlachogiannis JG, Lee KY. Economic load dispatch—A
comparative study on heuristic optimization techniques with
an improved coordinated aggregation-based PSO. IEEE Trans
Power Syst2009;24(2):991–1001.
85. Bird S, Li XD. Adaptively choosing niching parameters in a
PSO. In: Proceedings of the 8th annual conference on genetic and
evolutionary computation. New York: ACM; 2006. p. 3–10.
86. Fang W, Sun J, Chen HH, et al. A decentralized quantum-
inspired particle swarm optimization algorithm with cellular
structured population. Inf Sci Int J2016;330(C):19–48.
87. Lu Y, Zeng NY, Liu YR, et al. A hybrid wavelet neural
network and switching particle swarm optimization algorithm
for face direction recognition. Neurocomputing 2015;155
(C):219–24
.
88. Liu TY, Jiao LC, Ma WP, et al. A new quantum-behaved
particle swarm optimization based on cultural evolution
mechanism for multiobjective problems. Knowl Based Syst
2016;101(C):90–9.
89. Petra´ cˇ ek P, Walter V, Ba ´ cˇ a T, et al. Bio-inspired compact
swarms of unmanned aerial vehicles without communication
and external localization. Bioinspir Biomim2020;16(2):026009.
90. Tan Y. Swarm robotics: Collective behavior inspired by nature.
J Comput Sci Syst Biol2013;6(6):e106.
91. Duarte M, Costa V, Gomes J, et al. Evolution of collective
behaviors for a real swarm of aquatic surface robots. PLoS One
2016;11(3):e0151834.
92. Deng YS, Ogura M, Li AY, et al. Shepherding control for
separating a single agent from a swarm. IFAC-Papers on Line
2022;55(40):217–22.
93. Gold J, Wang A, Harrington K. Feedback Control of Evolving
Swarms. In: ALIFE 14: The fourteenth international conference
on the synthesis and simulation of living systems. Pasadena: MIT
Press; 2014. p. 884–91.
18 C. WANG et al.

===== PAGE 19 =====
94. Dong HR, Zhao Y, Gao SG. A fuzzy-rule-based Couzin model.
J Contr Theory Appl2013;11(2):311–5.
95. Ruangdech S, Hauert S, Homer M. Inferring swarm models
using a single monitoring robot. ALIFE 2019: The 2019
conference on artiﬁcial life . 2019, MIT Press; Pasadena,
278–9.
96. Liu XY, Xiang XJ, Chang Y, et al. Hierarchical weighting
vicsek model for ﬂocking navigation of drones. Drones 2021;5
(3):74.
97. Yang M, Tian YT, Qi XY. Behavior analysis of swarm robot
systems based on vicsek model. In: 2008 fourth international
conference on natural computation. Piscataway: IEEE Press;
2008. p. 594–8.
98. Berlinger F, Gauci M, Nagpal R. Implicit coordination for 3D
underwater collective behaviors in a ﬁsh-inspired robot swarm.
Sci Robot2021;6(50):eabd8668.
99. Arenas A, Dı ´az-Guilera A, Kurths J, et al. Synchronization in
complex networks. Phys Rep2008;469(3):93–153.
100. Chiba K, Makino Y, Takatoya T. PSO/GA hybrid method and
its application to supersonic-transport wing design. J Comput
Sci Technol2008;2(1):268–80.
101. Mi BG, Cheng SX, Luo Y, et al. A new many-objective
aerodynamic optimization method for symmetrical elliptic
airfoils by PSO and direct-manipulation-based parametric
mesh deformation. Aerosp Sci Technol2022;120:107296.
102. Jiang TY, Li J, Huang KW. Longitudinal parameter
identiﬁcation of a small unmanned aerial vehicle based on
modiﬁed particle swarm optimization. Chin J Aeronaut2015;28
(3):865–73
.
103. Xu FR, Chen MQ, Liang XL, et al. PSO optimized active
disturbance rejection control for aircraft anti-skid braking
system. Algorithms 2022;15(5):158.
104. Koreanschi A, Sugar Gabor O, Acotto J, et al. Optimization
and design of an aircraft’s morphing wing-tip demonstrator for
drag reduction at low speed, Part I-Aerodynamic optimization
using genetic, bee colony and gradient descent algorithms. Chin
J Aeronaut2017;30(1):149–63.
105. Edelstein-Keshet L. Simple models for trail-following
behaviour; Trunk trails versus individual foragers. J Math
Biol 1994;32(4):303–28.
106. Deneubourg JL, Aron S, Goss S, et al. The self-organizing
exploratory pattern of the Argentine ant. J Insect Behav1990;3
(2):159–68
.
107. Deneubourg JL, Goss S, Franks N, et al. The blind leading the
blind: Modeling chemically mediated army ant raid patterns. J
Insect Behav1989;2(5):719–25.
108. Franks NR. Army Ants: a collective intelligence: A neural
network seems an apt analogy as a colony of army ants
navigates the tropical rain forest. Am Sci1989;77(2):138–45.
109. Aron S, Pasteels J, Deneubourg J. Trail-laying behaviour
during exploratory recruitment in the Argentine ant:
Iridomyrmex humilis (Mayr). Biol Behav1989;14:207–17.
110. Dorigo M. Positive feedback as a search strategy. Tech. Rep
1991;91–16.
111. Dorigo M, Gambardella LM. Ant colonies for the travelling
salesman problem. Biosystems 1997;43(2):73–81.
112. Dorigo M, Gambardella LM. Ant colony system: A
cooperative learning approach to the traveling salesman
problem. IEEE Trans Evol Comput1997;1(1):53–66.
113. Stu¨ tzle T, Hoos H H. Improving the Ant System: A detailed
report on the MAX–MIN Ant System. Darmstadt: Darmstadt
University of Technology, Computer Science Department;
1996. Report No.: AIDA–96–12.
114. Sttzle TG. Local search algorithms for combinatorial problems:
Analysis, improvements, and new applications [dissertation].
Darmstadt: Darmstadt University of Technology; 1998.
115. Dorigo M, Stu ¨ tzle T. Ant colony optimization: Overview and
recent advances. Handbook of metaheuristics. Cham: Springer;
2019. p. 311–51 .
116. Dorigo M, Maniezzo V, Colorni A. The ant system: An
autocatalytic optimizing process. Milano: Politecnico di
Milano; 1991. Report No.: 91-016.
117. Dorigo M. Optimization, learning and natural algorithms
[dissertation]. Milano: Politecnico di Milano; 1992.
118.
Gambardella LM, Dorigo M. Ant-Q: A reinforcement learning
approach to the traveling salesman problem. Machine learning
proceedings 1995. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 1995. p. 252–60 .
119. Maniezzo V. Exact and approximate nondeterministic tree-
search procedures for the quadratic assignment problem. Inf J
Comput 1999;11(4):358–69.
120. Guntsch M, Middendorf M. A population based approach for
ACO. In: Applications of evolutionary computing:
EvoWorkshops 2002: EvoCOP, EvoIASP, EvoSTIM/
EvoPLAN Kinsale.Berlin: Springer; 2002. p. 72–81.
121. Blum C. Theoretical and practical aspects of ant colony
optimization. Amsterdam: IOS press; 2004. p. 10–7 .
122. Deng T, Xiong ZM, Liu YJ, et al. Research on 3D route
planning for UAV in low-altitude penetration based on
improved ant colony algorithm. Appl Mech Mater
2013;442:556–61.
123. Dai XL, Long S, Zhang ZW, et al. Mobile robot path planning
based on ant colony algorithm with A* heuristic method. Front
Neurorobot 2019;13:15.
124. Chaˆ ari I, Koubaˆ a A, Bennaceur H, et al. smartPATH: A hybrid
ACO-GA algorithm for robot path planning. Piscataay: IEEE
Press; 2012. p. 1–8
.
125. Zhu QB, Yang ZJ. An ant colony optimization algorithm based
on mutation and dynamic pheromone updating. J Softw
2004;15(2):185–92 [Chinese] .
126. Sangeetha V, Krishankumar R, Ravichandran KS, et al.
Energy-efﬁcient green ant colony optimization for path
planning in dynamic 3D environments. Soft Comput A Fusion
Found Methodol Appl2021;25(6):4749–69.
127. Oleiwi BK, Roth H, Kazem BI. A hybrid approach based on
ACO and Ga for multi objective mobile robot path planning.
Appl Mech Mater2014;527:203–12.
128. Cekmez U, Ozsiginan M, Sahingoz OK. A UAV path planning
with parallel ACO algorithm on CUDA platform. In: 2014
international conference on unmanned aircraft systems
(ICUAS). Piscataay: IEEE Press; 2014. p. 347–54.
129. Sangeetha V, Krishankumar R, Ravichandran KS, et al. A
fuzzy gain-based dynamic ant colony optimization for path
planning in dynamic environments. Symmetry 2021;13
(2):280–301
.
130. Xiong N, Zhou XZ, Yang XQ, et al. Mobile robot path
planning based on time taboo ant colony optimization in
dynamic environment. Front Neurorobot2021;15:642733.
131. Ajeil FH, Ibraheem IK, Azar AT, et al. Grid-based mobile
robot path planning using aging-based ant colony optimization
algorithm in static and dynamic environments. Sensors 2020;20
(7):1880
.
132. Conradt L, Roper TJ. Conﬂicts of interest and the evolution of
decision sharing. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci2009;364
(1518):807–19
.
133. Strandburg-Peshkin A, Papageorgiou D, Crofoot MC, et al.
Inferring inﬂuence and leadership in moving animal groups.
Phil Trans R Soc B2018;373(1746):20170006.
134. Nagy M, Akos Z, Biro D, et al. Hierarchical group dynamics in
pigeon ﬂocks. Nature 2010;464(7290):890–3.
135. Couzin ID, Krause J, Franks NR, et al. Effective leadership
and decision-making in animal groups on the move. Nature
2005;433(7025):513–6.
Swarm intelligence: A survey of model classiﬁcation and applications 19

===== PAGE 20 =====
136. Couzin ID, Ioannou CC, Demirel G, et al. Uninformed
individuals promote democratic consensus in animal groups.
Science 2011;334(6062):1578–80.
137. Strandburg-Peshkin A, Farine DR, Couzin ID, et al. Shared
decision-making drives collective movement in wild baboons.
Science 2015;348(6241):1358–61.
138. Strandburg-Peshkin A, Twomey CR, Bode NWF, et al. Visual
sensory networks and effective information transfer in animal
groups. Curr Biol2013;23(17):R709–11.
139. Rosenthal SB, Twomey CR, Hartnett AT, et al. Revealing the
hidden networks of interaction in mobile animal groups allows
prediction of complex behavioral contagion. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA2015;112(15):4690–5.
140. Smith JE, Estrada JR, Richards HR, et al. Collective
movements, leadership and consensus costs at reunions in
spotted hyaenas. Anim Behav2015;105:187–200.
141. Tokuyama N, Furuichi T. Leadership of old females in
collective departures in wild bonobos (Pan paniscus) at
Wamba. Behav Ecol Sociobiol2017;71(3):55.
142. Nagy M, Va ´ sa´ rhelyi G, Pettit B, et al. Context-dependent
hierarchies in pigeons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013;110
(32):13049–54
.
143. Butail S, Mwaffo V, Porﬁri M. Model-free information-
theoretic approach to infer leadership in pairs of zebraﬁsh.
Phys Rev E2016;93:042411.
144. King AJ, Douglas CMS, Huchard E, et al. Dominance and
afﬁliation mediate despotism in a social primate. Curr Biol
2008;18(23):1833–8.
145. Sa´ nchez-To´ jar A, Schroeder J, Farine DR. A practical guide for
inferring reliable dominance hierarchies and estimating their
uncertainty. J Anim Ecol2018;87(3):594–608.
146. Farine DR, Whitehead H. Constructing, conducting and
interpreting animal social network analysis. J Anim Ecol
2015;84(5):1144–63.
147. Bonnell TR, Henzi SP, Barrett L. Direction matching for sparse
movement data sets: Determining interaction rules in social
groups. Behav Ecol2017;28(1):193–203.
148. Farine DR. A guide to null models for animal social network
analysis. Methods Ecol Evol2017;8(10):1309–20.
149. Aplin LM, Firth JA, Farine DR, et al. Consistent individual
differences in the social phenotypes of wild great tits. Parus
major. Anim Behav2015;108:117–27.
150. Peng ZH, Wang D, Chen ZY, et al. Adaptive dynamic surface
control for formations of autonomous surface vehicles with
uncertain dynamics. IEEE Trans Contr Syst Technol2013;21
(2):513–20
.
151. Xiao J, Huang MX, Wu D, et al., A multi-robot formation
control method based on an improved leader-following
algorithm, In: Chinese intelligent systems conference , 2020,
Singapore; Springer Singapore. p. 558–71.
152. Chen H, Wang XK, Shen LC, et al. Formation ﬂight of ﬁxed-
wing UAV swarms: a group-based hierarchical approach. Chin
J Aeronaut2021;34(2):504–15.
153. Zhu XD, Lai JZ, Chen S. Cooperative location method for
leader-follower UAV formation based on follower UAV’s
moving vector. Sensors 2022;22(19):7125.
154. Huang JS, Wang W, Wen CY, et al. Distributed adaptive
leader–follower and leaderless consensus control of a class of
strict-feedback nonlinear systems: a uniﬁed approach.
Automatica 2020;118:109021.
155. Zhang XF, Liu L, Feng G. Leader-follower consensus of time-
varying nonlinear multi-agent systems. Autom J IFAC2015;52
(C):8–14.
156. Wang L, Dai HP, Dong H, et al. Adaptive synchronization of
weighted complex dynamical networks through pinning. Eur
Phys J B2008;61(3):335–42.
157. Zhang SY, Song SZ, Wang L, et al. Stability veriﬁcation for
heterogeneous complex networks via iterative SOS
programming. IEEE Contr Syst Lett2022;7:559–64.
158. Wang L, Chen MZQ, Wang QG. Bounded synchronization of a
heterogeneous complex switched network. Autom J IFAC
2015;56(C):19–24.
159. Zhang SY, Wang L, Xue B, et al. Consensus veriﬁcation for
heterogeneous polynomial networked systems. J Frankl Inst
2023;360(17):12878–91.
160. Bai H, Arcak M, Wen JT. Adaptive motion coordination:
Using relative velocity feedback to track a reference velocity.
Automatica 2009;45(4):1020–5.
161. Dong WJ. Adaptive consensus seeking of multiple nonlinear
systems. Adapt Control Sig2012;26(5):419–34.
162. Homayouni SM, Tang SH, Ismail N, et al. A hybrid genetic-
heuristic algorithm for scheduling of automated guided vehicles
and quay cranes in automated container terminals. In: 2009
international conference on computers & industrial engineering.
Piscataay: IEEE Press; 2009. p. 96–101.
163. Ame´ JM, Halloy J, Rivault C, et al. Collegial decision making
based on social ampliﬁcation leads to optimal group formation.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA2006;103(15):5835–40.
164. Viscido SV, Parrish JK, Gru ¨ nbaum D. Individual behavior and
emergent properties of ﬁsh schools: A comparison of
observation and theory. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 2004;273:
239–49
.
165. Bialek W, Cavagna A, Giardina I, et al. Statistical mechanics
for natural ﬂocks of birds. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA2012;109
(13):4786–91
.
166. Cavagna A, Cimarelli A, Giardina I, et al. Scale-free
correlations in starling ﬂocks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2010;107(26):11865–70.
167. Cavagna A, Giardina I, Orlandi A, et al. The STARFLAG
handbook on collective animal behaviour: Part I, empirical
methods. arXiv preprint: 0802.1668; 2008.
168. Toner J, Tu YH. Flocks, herds, and schools: A quantitative
theory of ﬂocking. Phys Rev E1998;58(4):4828–58.
169. Zienkiewicz AK, Ladu F, Barton DAW, et al. Data-driven
modelling of social forces and collective behaviour in zebraﬁsh.
J Theor Biol2018;443:39–51.
170. Escobedo R, Lecheval V, Papaspyros V, et al. A data-driven
method for reconstructing and modelling social interactions in
moving animal groups. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
1807;2020(375):20190380.
171. Song X, Shao XW, Zhang QS, et al. A fully online and
unsupervised system for large and high-density area
surveillance: Tracking, semantic scene learning and
abnormality detection. ACM Trans Intell Syst Technol2013;4
(2):35
.
172. Kratz L, Nishino K. Going with the ﬂow: Pedestrian efﬁciency
in crowded scenes. In: Computer vision – ECCV 2012. Berlin:
Springer; 2012. p. 558–72.
173. Rodriguez M, Sivic J, Laptev I, et al. Data-driven crowd
analysis in videos. In: 2011 international conference on computer
vision. Piscataay: IEEE Press; 2011. p. 1235–42.
174. Bera A, Manocha D. Realtime multilevel crowd tracking using
reciprocal velocity obstacles. In: 2014 22nd international
conference on pattern recognition. Piscataay: IEEE Press;
2014. p. 4164–9.
175. Kar AK, Aswani R. How to differentiate propagators of
information and misinformation–Insights from social media
analytics based on bio-inspired computing. J Inf Optim Sci
2021;42(6):1307–35.
20 C. WANG et al.