

===== PAGE 1 =====
Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871
Ant algorithms and stigmergy
Marco Dorigoa;, Eric Bonabeaub, Guy Theraulazc
a IRIDIA, Université Libre de Bruxelles, CP 194/6, Avenue Franklin Roosevelt 50, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
b EuroBios, Paris, France
c Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France
Abstract
Ant colonies, and more generally social insect societies, are distributed systems that, in spite of the simplicity of their
individuals, present a highly structured social organization. As a result of this organization, ant colonies can accomplish
complex tasks that in some cases far exceed the individual capacities of a single ant. The study of ant colonies behavior and
of their self-organizing capacities is interesting for computer scientists because it provides models of distributed organization
which are useful to solve difﬁcult optimization and distributed control problems. In this paper we overview some models
derived from the observation of real ants, emphasizing the role played bystigmergyas distributed communication paradigm,
and we show how these models have inspired a number of novel algorithms for the solution of distributed optimization and
distributed control problems. © 2000 Elsevier Science B.V . All rights reserved.
Keywords:Ant algorithms; Ant colony optimization; Swarm intelligence; Social insects; Self-organization; Metaheuristics
1. Introduction
Ant colonies have always fascinated human beings.
Books on ants, ranging from pure literature [52,87] to
detailed scientiﬁc accounts of all the aspects of their
life [31,42,43], have often met extraordinary public
success. What particularly strikes the occasional ob-
server as well as the scientist is the high degree of
societal organization that these insects can achieve in
spite of very limited individual capabilities. Ants ap-
peared on the earth some 100 millions of years ago,
and their current population is estimated to be around
10
16 individuals [43]. An approximate computation
tells us that their total weight is the same order of
Corresponding author. Tel.:C32-2-650-3169;
fax:C32-2-650-2715.
E-mail addresses:mdorigo@ulb.ac.be (M. Dorigo),
eric.bonabeau@biosgroup.com (E. Bonabeau), theraula@cict.fr
(G. Theraulaz)
magnitude as the total weight of human beings; like
human beings, they can be found virtually everywhere
on the earth. Ants are undoubtedly one of the most
successful species on the earth today, and they have
been so for the last 100 million years. It is therefore
not surprising that computer scientists have taken in-
spiration from studies of the behavior of ant colonies,
and more generally of social insects, to design algo-
rithms for the control of multi-agent systems.
A particularly interesting body of work is the one
that focuses on the concept ofstigmergy, a particular
form of indirect communication used by social in-
sects to coordinate their activities. By exploiting the
stigmergic approach to coordination, researchers have
been able to design a number of successful algorithms
in such diverse application ﬁelds as combinatorial op-
timization, routing in communication networks, task
allocation in a multi-robot system, exploratory data
analysis, graph drawing and partitioning, and so on
[2,26].
0167-739X/00/$ – see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science B.V . All rights reserved.
PII:S0167-739X(00)00042-X

===== PAGE 2 =====
852 M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871
The termstigmergywas introduced by Grassé [39]
to describe a form of indirect communication me-
diated by modiﬁcations of the environment that he
observed in two species of termites:Bellicositermes
Natalensisand Cubitermes. Grassé’s original deﬁni-
tion of stigmergy was:
“Stimulation of workers
1 by the performance they
have achieved”.
Although Grassé ﬁrst introduced the term stigmergy
to explain the behavior of termites societies, the same
term has later been used to indicate indirect commu-
nication mediated by modiﬁcations of the environ-
ment that can be observed also in other social insects
[80].
Nest building in termites is the typical example of
stigmergy, and is also the original example used by
Grassé to introduce the concept. Termite workers use
soil pellets, which they impregnate with pheromone
(i.e., a diffusing chemical substance) to build pil-
lars. Two successive phases take place during nest
reconstruction [39]. First, a non-coordinated phase
occurs which is characterized by a random depo-
sition of pellets. This phase lasts until one of the
deposits reaches a critical size (Fig. 1). Then, a co-
ordination phase starts if the group of builders is
sufﬁciently large and pillars emerge. The existence
of an initial deposit of soil pellets stimulates work-
ers to accumulate more material through a positive
feedback mechanism, since the accumulation of ma-
terial reinforces the attractivity of deposits through
the diffusing pheromone emitted by the pellets [6].
This autocatalyticsnowball effect leads to the coor-
dinated phase. If the density of builders is too small,
the pheromone disappears between two successive
passages by the workers, and the ampliﬁcation mech-
anism cannot work, which leads to a non-coordinated
behavior. The system undergoes a bifurcation at this
critical density: no pillar emerges below it, but pil-
lars can emerge above it. This example therefore
illustrates positive feedback (the snowball effect),
negative feedback (pheromone decay), the ampliﬁca-
tion of ﬂuctuations (pillars could emerge anywhere),
multiple interactions (through the environment), the
emergence of structure (i.e., pillars) out of an initially
homogenous medium (i.e., a random spatial distri-
bution of soil pellets), multistability (again, pillars
1 Workers are one of the castes in termite colonies.
Fig. 1. An example of stigmergic process as it appears in the
construction of pillars in termites. Assume that the architecture
reaches stateS
0, which triggers responseR0 from workerI. S0
is modiﬁed by the action ofI (e.g.,I may drop a soil pellet),
and transformed into a new stimulating conﬁgurationS1 that may
in turn trigger a new responseR1 from I or any other workerIn
and so forth. The successive responsesR1;R2;:::;R n may be
produced by any worker carrying a soil pellet. Each worker creates
new stimuli in response to existing stimulating conﬁgurations.
These new stimuli then act on the same termite or on any other
worker in the colony. Such a process, where the only relevant
interactions taking place among the agents are indirect, through
the environment which is modiﬁed by the other agents, is also
called sematectonic communication [89].

===== PAGE 3 =====
M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871 853
Fig. 2. Four simulation steps showing the temporal evolution of the structure built by termites in a 2D system. This simulation shows
the evolution of the density of building material (on thez-axis) used by termites to build their nest obtained from Deneubourg’s model
[15]. The simulation begins with a random distribution of building material in space (step 1) and the regularity of the inter-pillar spacing
emerges progressively over time (steps 2, 3 and 4). (From [82]; reprinted by permission of Birkhävser Verlag.)
may emerge anywhere) and bifurcation which make
up the signatures of self-organized phenomena. From
the experimental observations, Deneubourg [15] de-
signed a chemotaxis-based reaction–diffusion model
that exhibits the desired properties for appropriate
parameter values. Fig. 2 shows the two-dimensional
spatial distribution of pillars obtained with his model.
In this model, coordination emerges out of indirect
(stigmergic) interactions among workers.
In this paper anant algorithmis informally deﬁned
as a multi-agent system inspired by the observation of
some real ant colony behavior exploiting stigmergy.
In ant algorithms the agents are calledartiﬁcial ants,
or often simplyants, and coordination among ants is
achieved by exploiting the stigmergic communication
mechanism.
The implementation of ant algorithms is made pos-
sible by the use of so-calledstigmergic variables, i.e.,

===== PAGE 4 =====
854 M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871
variables that contain the information used by artiﬁcial
ants to indirectly communicate. In some cases, as dis-
cussed, e.g., in Section 2, the stigmergic variable is a
speciﬁcally deﬁned variable used by ants to adaptively
change the way they build solutions to the considered
problem. In other cases, as discussed in Sections 3 and
4, the stigmergic variable is one of the problem vari-
ables: in this case a change in its value determines not
only a change in the way a solution to the problem is
built, but also a direct change in the solution of the
problem itself.
In the rest of this article we provide a number
of examples of ant algorithms and for each example
we highlight the role played by stigmergy. Each sec-
tion deals with a particular behavior observed in ant
colonies: foraging (Section 2), division of labor (Sec-
tion 3), and clustering (Section 4). The ﬁrst part of each
section provides a brief description of the observed
phenomenon followed by a description of models de-
veloped by ethologists to understand the phenomenon;
engineering-oriented applications, that make use of
the emergent behavior of ant colonies, are then pre-
sented. It is worth noting that not all kinds of ant algo-
rithms are equally advanced: some of them are among
the best available approaches for selected problems,
while others are just proofs of concept and further
work needs to be done to fully evaluate their poten-
tialities. Therefore, the various sections of this review
article may emphasize different aspects, the biology
or the engineering side. Sections that emphasize appli-
cations are useful because they show very clearly the
way our understanding of how ants collectively solve
problems can be applied to design algorithms and dis-
tributed problem-solving devices; those emphasizing
the biology are useful because, we believe, they pro-
vide new ideas to design new types of algorithms and
distributed artiﬁcial devices.
2. Pheromone trail following and discrete
optimization
2.1. Foraging in ants
A lot of ant species have a trail-laying/trail-
following behavior when foraging [42]: individual
ants deposit pheromone while walking and for-
agers follow pheromone trails with some probability.
Deneubourg et al. [16] have shown with an ingenious
Fig. 3. Experimental setup (insert) and percentage of ants that
used lower and upper branches as a function of time. Modiﬁed
from Deneubourg et al. [16].
experiment, run with ants of the speciesLinepithema
humile, that this behavior can explain how ants ﬁnd
the shortest path between their nest and a food source.
The experimental setup is the following.
A food source is connected to an ant nest by a bridge
with two equally long branches (Fig. 3). When the
experiment starts the ants select randomly, with equal
probability, one of the branches. Because of statistical
ﬂuctuations one of the two branches is chosen by a
few more ants than the other and therefore is marked
by a slightly higher amount of pheromone. The greater
amount of pheromone on this branch stimulates more
ants to choose it, and so on [17]. This autocatalytic
process leads very soon the ant colony to converge
towards the use of only one of the two branches.
The experiment can also be run using a bridge with
two branches of different length. In this case, the ﬁrst
ants coming back to the nest are those that took the
shortest path twice (to go from the nest to the source
and to return to the nest), so that more pheromone is
present on the short branch than on the long branch
immediately after these ants have returned, stimulating
nestmates to choose the short branch (Fig. 4). This has
been calleddifferential length effect[25] and explains
how ants in the long run end up choosing the shortest
of the two paths without using any global knowledge
about their environment. Differential length effect and
pheromone based autocatalysis are at the earth of some
successful ant algorithms for discrete optimization, in
which an artiﬁcial pheromone plays the role of stig-

===== PAGE 5 =====
M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871 855
Fig. 4. (a) Experimental setup and drawings of the selection of the short branches by a colony ofLinephitema humile, 4 and 8 min after
the bridge was placed. (b) Distribution of the percentage of ants that selected the shorter branch overn experiments. The longer branch
isr times longer than the short branch. The second graph (nD18, r D2) corresponds to an experiment in which the short branch is
presented to the colony 30 min after the long branch: the short branch is not selected, and the colony remains trapped on the long branch.
Modiﬁed from Goss et al. [38].
mergic variable, as explained in the following section.
It is also interesting to note that in some ant species
the amount of pheromone deposited is proportional
to the quality of the food source found: paths that
lead to better food sources receive a higher amount
of pheromone. Similarly, in the ant algorithms pre-
sented in this section artiﬁcial ants deposit a quantity
of pheromone proportional to the quality of the solu-
tion they found.
2.2. Ant System and the Traveling Salesman Problem
Ant System (AS) was the ﬁrst algorithm [24,29]
inspired by the trail-following behavior of ants to
be applied to a discrete optimization problem. The
problem chosen for the ﬁrst experiments was the
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP). In the TSP, one
has to ﬁnd a closed tour of minimal length connecting
ngiven cities. Each city must be visited once and only
once. Letd
ij be the distance between citiesci and cj.
The problem can either be deﬁned in Euclidean space
(in which cased
ij is simply the Euclidean distance
between citiesi and j), or can be more generally
deﬁned on a graphG D .V;E/, where the cities
are the vertices (V) and the connections between the
cities are the edges of the graph (E). Note that the
graph need not be fully connected and the distance
matrix need not be symmetric: if it is asymmetric
the corresponding problem is called the asymmetric
TSP.
In AS the ants build solutions in parallel by visiting
sequentially the cities of the graph. On each edge.i;j/

===== PAGE 6 =====
856 M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871
of the TSP graph anartiﬁcial pheromone trailij.t/
is maintained. The valuesij.t/ are used by ants to
direct the way they build tours. They are updated by
means of a reinforcement procedure: once an ant has
completed a tour it updates the edges it has crossed
by adding a quantity of pheromone proportional to the
goodness of the tour.
More formally, at iteration
2 t, after completing its
tourTk.t/, thekth ant lays a quantity of pheromone
1k
ij.t/on each edge.i;j/ belonging toTk.t/;1k
ij.t/
is a function of the lengthLk of tourTk.t/:
1k
ij.t/ D
(
Q=Lk if edge.i;j/ 2Tk.t/;
0 if edge .i;j/ =2Tk.t/; (1)
where Qis an adjustable parameter.
Ants build solutions using a probabilistic transition
rule. The probabilitypk
ij.t/with which an antkin city
i at iterationt chooses the next cityj to move to is a
function of the following:
Whether or not cityj has already been visited. For
each ant, a list is maintained that contains all the
cities that the ant has already visited in order to
prevent cities from being visited more than once;
the list grows within one tour until it is full, and
is then emptied at the end of the iteration; we call
J
k.i/ the set of cities that remain to be visited by
antkwhen antkis in cityi.
An heuristic measureij of the desirabilityof
adding edge.i;j/ to the solution under construc-
tion. In the TSP a reasonable heuristic isij D
1=dij, i.e., the inverse of the distance between cities
i and j.
The amount ij.t/ of artiﬁcial pheromoneon the
edge connectingi and j.
Formallypk
ij.t/ is given by
pk
ij.t/ D
8
<
:
[ij.t/][ij]
P
l2Jk.i/[il.t/][il] if j 2Jk.i/;
0i f j=2Jk.i/;
(2)
where and are two adjustable parameters that con-
trol the relative inﬂuences of pheromone trailij.t/
and heuristic desirabilityij.I f D0, the closest
cities are more likely to be selected: this corresponds
to a classical stochastic greedy algorithm (with multi-
2 The iteration counter is incremented by 1 when all ants have
completed a tour.
ple starting points since ants are initially randomly dis-
tributed on the cities). If on the contrary D0, only
pheromone ampliﬁcation is at work: this method will
lead the system to astagnationsituation, i.e., to a situa-
tion in which all the ants generate a same, sub-optimal
tour [24,29,30]. The trade-off between edge length and
trail intensity therefore appears to be necessary.
Finally, AS could not perform well without
pheromone evaporation. In fact, because the initial
exploration of the search space is mostly random, the
values of the pheromone trails in the initial phases are
not very informative and it is therefore necessary that
the system slowly forgets these initial values to allow
the ants to move towards better solutions. Pheromone
decay is implemented by introducing a coefﬁcient of
evaporation;0 < 1, such that

ij.tC1/D.1 − /ij.t/C1ij.t/; (3)
where 1ij.t/ DPm
kD11k
ij.t/ and mis the number
of ants.
The initial amount of pheromone on edges is as-
sumed to be a small positive constantc(i.e., there is
an homogeneous distribution of pheromone att D0).
The total numberm of ants (assumed constant over
time) is an important parameter. Too few ants will not
produce the expected synergistic effects of coopera-
tion
3 because of the (otherwise necessary) process
of pheromone evaporation. On the contrary, too many
ants result in a less efﬁcient computational system: the
quality of the results produced after a given number
of iterations does not improve signiﬁcantly, but, due
to the higher number of ants, it takes longer to per-
form an algorithm iteration. Dorigo [24] suggests that
m Dn, i.e., as many ants as there are cities in the
problem, provides a good trade-off.
Ant System has been tested on several relatively
small problems. The experimentally optimized value
of the parameters has been set to D1,  D5,
 D0:5 andQD100. Although the results obtained
were not state-of-the-art on the TSP [24,29,30], AS
compared well with other general purpose metaheuris-
tic methods, like simulated annealing, evolutionary
computation, and tabu search. But, most important,
AS gave rise to a whole set of successful applications
3 Remember the termites nest building behavior of Section 1:
as in that case, too few ants cannot overcome the evaporation of
pheromone and stigmergic coordination cannot take place.

===== PAGE 7 =====
M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871 857
and extensions which have recently been uniﬁed in
a novel metaheuristic calledAnt Colony Optimization
(ACO).
2.3. The ACO metaheuristic
The ACO metaheuristic [25] is a novel metaheuris-
tic obtained a posteriori after a careful analysis of
the characteristics of a number of ant algorithms
inspired by the foraging behavior of ants (most of
these algorithms were strongly inspired by AS).
ACO algorithms, i.e., heuristic algorithms obtained
as instances of the ACO metaheuristic, can be used
to ﬁnd feasible minimum cost paths over a graph
G D .C;L;W/ , where feasibility is deﬁned with
respect to a set/Omega1of constraints. The graphG D
.C;L;W/ and the constraints/Omega1are deﬁned as fol-
lows:C Dfc
1;c2;:::;c ngis a ﬁnite set of problem
components, L Dflcicjjci;cj 2Cga ﬁnite set of
possibleconnectionsamong the elements ofC,W a
set of weights associated either to the componentsC
or to the connectionsLor to both, and/Omega1.C;L;/is
a ﬁnite set ofconstraintsassigned over the elements
ofCand L( indicates that the set of constraints can
change over time). For example, in the TSP deﬁned
in Section 2.2,Cis the set of cities,Lthe set of edges
connecting cities,W the length of the edges inL, and
the constraints/Omega1impose that in any feasible solution
each city appears once and only once. A feasible path
over G is called a solution and a minimum cost
path is an optimal solution and is indicated by 
;
f. / is the cost of solution , andf. / the cost
of the optimal solution. In the TSP a solution is
an Hamiltonian circuit and  the shortest feasible
Hamiltonian circuit.
In ACO algorithms a colony of ants concurrently,
asynchronously and incrementally build solutions of
the problem deﬁned byG and /Omega1. Each antk starts
with a partial solution 
k.1/ consisting of one ele-
ment (one of the components inC) and adds compo-
nents to k.h/ till a complete feasible solution is
built, wherehis the step counter. Components to be
added to k.h/are stochastically chosen in an appro-
priately deﬁned neighborhood of the last component
added to 
k.h/. The ants stochastic choice is made by
applying a stochastic local decision policy that makes
use of local information available at the visited ver-
tices/components. Once an ant has built a solution,
or while the solution is being built, the ant evaluates
the (partial) solution and adds pheromone, i.e., infor-
mation about the quality of the (partial) solution, on
the components and/or the connections it used. This
pheromone information will direct the search of the
ants in the following iterations.
Besides ants’ activity, an ACO algorithm includes
a pheromone
evaporation()procedure and an optional
daemon actions()procedure. Pheromone evaporation,
as it was the case in AS, is the process by which
the pheromone trail automatically decreases over time.
“Daemon” actions can be used to implement cen-
tralized actions which cannot be performed by sin-
gle ants. Examples are the activation of a local op-
timization procedure, or the collection of global in-
formation that can be used to decide whether it is
useful or not to deposit additional pheromone to bias
the search process from a non-local perspective. As a
practical example, the daemon can observe the path
found by each ant in the colony and choose to deposit
extra pheromone on the edges used by the ant that
made the shortest path. In most applications to com-
binatorial optimization problems theants
activity(),
pheromone evaporation() anddaemon actions() pro-
cedures (see Fig. 5) are scheduled sequentially. Never-
theless, theschedule
activitiesconstruct of the ACO
metaheuristic (Fig. 5) leaves the decision on how these
three procedures must be synchronized to the user,
that is left free to match synchronization policies to
the considered problems (e.g., in the applications to
routing in telecommunication networks the execution
of the three procedures is often interleaved).
The ACO metaheuristic, which has been introduced
in [25] where the interested reader can ﬁnd a more de-
tailed formal deﬁnition, has been successfully applied
to many discrete optimization problems, as listed in
Table 1. Among the most studied problems there are
Fig. 5. Outline of the ACO metaheuristic.

===== PAGE 8 =====
858 M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871
Table 1
Current applications of ACO algorithmsa
Problem name Authors Algorithm name Year Main references
Traveling salesman Dorigo, Maniezzo and Colorni AS 1991 [24,29,30]
Gambardella and Dorigo Ant-Q 1995 [32]
Dorigo and Gambardella ACS and ACS-3-opt 1996 [27,28,33]
Stützle and Hoos MMAS 1997 [75,76,78]
Bullnheimer, Hartl and Strauss AS
rank 1997 [8,10]
Quadratic assignment Maniezzo, Colorni and Dorigo AS-QAP 1994 [57]
Gambardella, Taillard and Dorigo HAS-QAP b 1997 [36,37]
Stützle and Hoos MMAS-QAP 1997 [74,77]
Maniezzo ANTS-QAP 1998 [53]
Maniezzo and Colorni AS-QAP
c 1999 [56]
Scheduling problems Colorni, Dorigo and Maniezzo AS-JSP 1994 [12]
Stützle AS-FSP 1997 [71]
Bauer et al. ACS-SMTTP 1999 [1]
den Besten, Stützle and Dorigo ACS-SMTWTP 1999 [14]
Vehicle routing Bullnheimer, Hartl and Strauss AS-VRP 1997 [7,9]
Gambardella, Taillard and Agazzi HAS-VRP 1999 [35]
Connection-oriented network routing Schoonderwoerd et al. ABC 1996 [68,69]
White, Pagurek and Oppacher ASGA 1998 [88]
Di Caro and Dorigo AntNet-FS 1998 [22]
Bonabeau et al. ABC-smart ants 1998 [3]
Connection-less network routing Di Caro and Dorigo AntNet and AntNet-FA 1997 [20,21,23]
Subramanian, Druschel and Chen Regular ants 1997 [79]
Heusse et al. CAF 1998 [41]
van der Put and Rothkrantz ABC-backward 1998 [84,85]
Sequential ordering Gambardella and Dorigo HAS-SOP 1997 [34]
Graph coloring Costa and Hertz ANTCOL 1997 [13]
Shortest common supersequence Michel and Middendorf AS-SCS 1998 [58,59]
Frequency assignment Maniezzo and Carbonaro ANTS-FAP 1998 [54,55]
Generalized assignment Ramalhinho Lourenço and Serra MMAS-GAP 1998 [65]
Multiple knapsack Leguizam ´on and Michalewicz AS-MKP 1999 [48]
Optical networks routing Navarro Varela and Sinclair ACO-VWP 1999 [61]
Redundancy allocation Liang and Smith ACO-RAP 1999 [49]
aApplications are listed by class of problems and in chronological order.
bHAS-QAP is an ant algorithm which does not follow all the aspects of the ACO metaheuristic.
cThis is a variant of the original AS-QAP.
the traveling salesman, the quadratic assignment and
routing in telecommunication networks. When applied
to these problems ACO algorithms result to be com-
petitive with the best available heuristic approaches.
In particular we observe the following:
Results obtained by the application of ACO algo-
rithms to the TSP are very encouraging (ACO al-
gorithms for the TSP are overviewed in [73]): they
are often better than those obtained using other gen-
eral purpose heuristics like evolutionary computa-
tion or simulated annealing. Also, when adding to
ACO algorithms local search procedures based on
3-opt [50], the quality of the results obtained [28,72]
is close to that obtainable by other state-of-the-art
methods.
ACO algorithms are currently one of the best per-
forming heuristics available for the particularly
important class of quadratic assignment problems
which model real world problems [37,53,56,57].
AntNet [21,23], an ACO algorithm for routing in
packet switched networks, outperformed a num-
ber of state-of-the-art routing algorithms for a set

===== PAGE 9 =====
M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871 859
of benchmark problems. AntNet-FA, an extension
of AntNet for connection oriented network rout-
ing problems, also shows competitive performance
[23].
HAS-SOP, an ACO algorithm coupled to a local
search routine, has improved many of the best
known results on a wide set of benchmark instances
of the sequential ordering problem (SOP) [34], i.e.,
the problem of ﬁnding the shortest Hamiltonian
path on a graph which satisﬁes a set of precedence
constraints on the order in which cities are visited.
ACO algorithms have also been applied to a num-
ber of other discrete optimization problems like the
shortest common supersequence problem, the vehi-
cle routing problem, the multiple knapsack, single
machine total tardiness, and others (see Table 1), with
very promising results.
3. Labor division and task allocation
3.1. Division of labor in ant colonies
Division of labor is an important and widespread
feature of life in ant colonies, and in social insects
in general (for a review, see, e.g., [63,67,70]). Social
insects are all characterized by one fundamental type
of division of labor, reproductive division of labor, a
main ingredient in the deﬁnition of eusociality.
4 Be-
yond this primary form of division of labor between
reproductive and worker castes, there most often exists
a further division of labor among workers, who tend to
perform speciﬁc tasks for some amount of time, rather
than to be generalists who perform various tasks all the
time. Workers are divided into age or morphological
subcastes. Age subcastes correspond to individuals of
the same age that tend to perform identical tasks: this
phenomenon is called temporal polyethism. In some
species, workers can have different morphologies:
workers that belong to different morphological castes
tend to perform different tasks. But even within an
age or morphological caste, there may be differences
4 Eusociality characterizes the highest level of sociality in the
animal kingdom; an animal group is said to be eusocial when the
following three traits are present: (i) a cooperation in caring for
the young, (ii) a reproductive division of labor with more or less
sterile individuals working on behalf of individuals engaged in
reproduction, and (iii) an overlap of generations.
among individuals in the frequency and sequence of
task performance: one may therefore speak of be-
havioral castes, to describe groups of individuals that
perform the same set of tasks in a given period.
One of the most striking aspects of division of labor
is plasticity, a property achieved through the workers’
behavioral ﬂexibility: the ratios of workers perform-
ing the different tasks that maintain the colony’s vi-
ability and reproductive success can vary (i.e., work-
ers switch tasks) in response to internal perturbations
or external challenges. An important question is to
understand how this ﬂexibility is implemented at the
level of individual workers, which do not possess any
global representation of the colony’s needs.
3.2. A simple model of task allocation in ant colonies
Bonabeau et al. [5] have developed a simple model
for task allocation in ants based on the notion of re-
sponse threshold [66,67]: individuals start to become
engaged in task performance when the level of the
task-associated stimuli, which plays the role of stig-
mergic variable, exceeds their threshold. Differences
in response thresholds may either reﬂect actual dif-
ferences in behavioral responses, or differences in the
way task-related stimuli are perceived. When special-
ized individuals performing a given task are withdrawn
(they have low response thresholds with respect to
stimuli related to this task), the associated task de-
mand increases and so does the intensity of the stim-
ulus, until it eventually reaches the higher character-
istic response thresholds of the remaining individuals
that are not initially specialized into that task; the in-
crease of stimulus intensity beyond threshold has the
effect of stimulating these individuals into performing
the task. This is exactly what was observed by Wilson
[90] in experiments where he artiﬁcially reduced the
minor/major (minor and major are two ant castes) ratio
to below 1 and observed a change in the rate of activ-
ity within 1 hour of the ratio change: for small ratios,
majors engage in tasks usually performed by minors
and efﬁciently replace the missing minors (the results
of one of these experiments are shown in Fig. 6).
What is a response threshold? Letsbe the intensity
of a stimulus associated with a particular task:scan be
a number of encounters, a chemical concentration, or
any quantitative cue sensed by individuals. A response
threshold, expressed in units of stimulus intensity,

===== PAGE 10 =====
860 M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871
Fig. 6. Number of behavioral acts (social behavior and
self-grooming) per major per hour as a function of the fraction of
majors in the colony for the speciesPheidole megacephala. Fit-
ting lines are only visual aids. (From Wilson [90], Fig. 6, p. 94;
reprinted by permission of Springer-Verlag.)
is an internal variable that determines the tendency of
an individual to respond to the stimulussand perform
the associated task. More precisely, is such that the
probability of response is low fors and high for
s . One family of response functionsT.s/ that
can be parametrized with thresholds that satisfy this
requirement is given by
T
.s/D sn
sn Cn; (4)
where n> 1 determines the steepness of the threshold.
In the rest of the section, we usen D2, but similar
results can be obtained with other values ofn> 1.
The meaning of is clear: fors, the probability
of engaging in task performance is close to 0, and for
s , this probability is close to 1; ats D, this
probability is exactly 1/2. Therefore, individuals with
a lower value of are likely to respond to a lower
level of stimulus.
Assume that there are two castes and that only one
task needs to be performed. This task is associated with
a stimulus or demand, the level of which increases if
it is not satisﬁed (because the task is not performed by
enough individuals, or not performed with enough ef-
ﬁciency). LetS
i be the state of an individuali(Si D0
corresponds to inactivity,Si D1 corresponds to per-
forming the task), andi the response threshold ofi,
iD1;2.
An inactive individual starts performing the task
with a probabilityP per unit time:
P.Si D0 !Si D1/D sn
sn Cn
i
: (5)
The probability that an individual will perform a
task depends ons, the magnitude of the task-associated
stimulus, that affects the probability of being exposed
to it, and on
i, the probability of responding to
task-related stimuli [67].
An active individual gives up task performance
and becomes inactive with probabilityp per time
unit (that we take identical for the two castes, i.e.,
p
1 Dp2 Dp):
P.Si D1 !Si D0/Dp; (6)
1=pis the average time spent by an individual in task
performance before giving up the task. It is assumed
thatpis ﬁxed, and independent of the stimulus. Indi-
viduals give-up task performance after 1=p, but may
become engaged again immediately if the stimulus is
still large. Variations in stimulus intensity are due to
task performance, which reduces stimulus intensity,
and to the autonomous increase of demand, i.e., irre-
spective of whether or not the task is performed. The
resulting equation for the evolution of stimulus inten-
sitys is therefore (in discrete time)
s.t C1/Ds.t/ C− n
act; (7)
where  is the increase, supposed to be constant, in
stimulus intensity per unit time,nactthe number of ac-
tive individuals, andis a scale factor measuring the
decrease in stimulus intensity due to the activity of one
individual, i.e., the efﬁciency of individual task per-
formance. In Monte Carlo simulations [5], this simple
ﬁxed threshold model shows remarkable agreement
with experimental results in the case where there are
two castes characterized by two different values of the
response threshold: when “minors”, with low response
thresholds, are removed from the simulated colony,
“majors”, with higher response thresholds, start to per-
form tasks usually performed by minors. Fig. 7 shows
the fraction of majors engaged in task performance
as a function of the fraction of majors in the colony.
This curve is very similar to the one observed by Wil-
son [89]. This simple model with one task can be eas-
ily extended to the case where there are two or more

===== PAGE 11 =====
M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871 861
Fig. 7. Comparison between simulation results and real ants data.
On the left vertical axis: number of ants per majors during Monte
Carlo simulations as a function of the fractionf of majors in the
colony (parameters:
1 D8;2 D1; D3; D1;p D0:2). On
the right vertical axis: Wilson’s [90] results (scaled so that curves
of model and experiments lie within the same range): number
of social behavior acts per major within time of experiments in
Pheidola guilelmimuelleriand Pheidole pubiventrisas a function
of the fractionf of majors in the colony (From [5], reprinted by
permission).
tasks to perform. In this case, each individual has a set
of thresholds, each threshold being associated to the
stimulus of a speciﬁc task or group of tasks.
The ﬁxed threshold model described above has been
used to organize a group of robots by Krieger and Bil-
leter [44]. They designed a group of Khepera robots
(miniature mobile robots aimed at “desktop” experi-
ments [60]) to collectively perform a puck-foraging
task. In one of the experiments they performed, pucks
spread in the environment are taken back by the robots
to the “nest” where they are dropped in a basket. The
available “energy” of the group, which plays the role
of stigmergic variable, decreases regularly with time,
but increases when pucks are dropped into the basket.
More energy is consumed during foraging trips than
when robots are immobile in the nest. Each robot has
a foraging threshold: when the energy of the colony
goes below the foraging threshold of a robot, the robot
leaves the nest to look for pucks in the environment.
Krieger and Billeter’s experiment has shown the
viability of the threshold-based stigmergic approach
to self-organization in a rather simple environment.
Further experimentation is necessary to test the
methodology on more complex tasks.
3.3. Adaptive task allocation: the example of mail
retrieval
The simple response threshold model, which
assumes that each worker responds to a given stim-
ulus when stimulus intensity exceeds the worker’s
threshold, can explain how ﬂexibility at the colony
level results from the workers’ behavioral ﬂexibility
[5]. But it has several limitations, because it assumes
that workers’ thresholds are ﬁxed over the studied
time-scale. In fact, it cannot account for the genesis
of task allocation for it assumes that individuals are
differentiated and roles preassigned, neither can it
account for robust task specialization within (phys-
ical or temporal) castes. Finally, as a model of real
ants behavior it is valid only over sufﬁciently short
time-scales, where thresholds can be considered con-
stant.
In order to overcome these limitations, Theraulaz et
al. [81,83] have extended the ﬁxed threshold model by
allowing thresholds to vary in time, following a simple
reinforcement process: a threshold decreases when the
corresponding task is performed, and increases when
the corresponding task is not performed. This idea had
been previously introduced by Oster [62], Deneubourg
et al. [19], and Plowright and Plowright [64], who
did not attempt to explore its consequences in detail,
especially when several tasks need to be performed.
It is this model with threshold reinforcement that has
been applied by Bonabeau et al. [4] to a problem of
adaptive mail retrieval.
Imagine that a group of mailmen belonging to an
express mail company have to pick-up letters in a city.
Customers should not have to wait more than a given
amount of time: the aim of the mail company is there-
fore to allocate the mailmen to the various demands
that appear in the course of the day so as to keep the
global demand as low as possible. The probability that
mailman i, located in zonez
i, respond to a demand
intensitysj in zonej is given by
pij D
s2
j
s2
j C2
ij Cd2
zij
; (8)

===== PAGE 12 =====
862 M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871
Fig. 8. Adaptive task allocation: simulation results. (a) Demand as a function of time (one iteration at each time step): one mailman is
removed at timet D2000. (b) Threshold dynamics of a particular mailman with respect to the zone for which a specialist is removed at
time t D2000. (From [4]; reprinted by permission World Scientiﬁc.)
where ij 2[min ;max ] is a response threshold of
mailman i to a demand from zonej, dzij the dis-
tance betweenzi and j (this distance can either be
Euclidean or include factors such as one-ways, lights,
trafﬁc jams, etc.), and and  are two parameters
that modulate the respective inﬂuences of and d.
Each time a mailman allocates himself to zonejto re-
trieve mail, his response thresholds are updated in the
following way:

ij  ij − 0; (9)
il  il − 1;l 2nj; (10)
ik  ik C for k6Dj and k=2nj; (11)
where nj is the set of zones surroundingj,0 and 1
are two learning coefﬁcients corresponding to the new
zone where that agent moved, and is the forgetting
coefﬁcient applied to response thresholds associated
with other zones.
Simulations have been performed with a grid of
55 zones (we consider four neighbors for the update
of Eq. (11) with periodic boundary conditions) and
ﬁve mailmen; at every iteration, the demand increases
in ﬁve randomly selected zones by an amount of 50,
D0:5, D500,
min D0,max D1000,0 D150,
1 D70, D10. Mailmen are swept in random or-
der, and they decide to respond to the demand from
a particular zone according to Eq. (8). If no mailman
responds after ﬁve sweepings, the next iteration starts.
If a mailman responds, this mailman will be unavail-
able for an amount of time that we take to be equal
to the distance separating his current location from
the zone where the demand comes from. Once the
mailman decides to allocate himself to that zone, the
associated demand in that zone is maintained at zero
(since any demand emerging between the time of the
mailman’s response and his arrival in the zone will
be satisﬁed by the same mailman). Fig. 8a shows how
the demand increases but is still kept under control
when one mailman fails to perform his task. Fig. 8b
shows how the threshold of a mailman with respect
to a single zone can vary as a function of time. A
special behavior can be observed after the removal of
a mailman specialist of a given zone: another mail-
man lowers his threshold with respect to that zone
and becomes in turn a new specialist of that zone.
This is what is observed in Fig. 8b. However, because
the workload may be too high to allow mailmen to
settle into a given specialization, response thresholds
may oscillate in time. All these features point to the
ﬂexibility and robustness of this algorithm.
Although we have presented the performance of
the algorithm on one speciﬁc example, it can cer-
tainly be modiﬁed to apply to virtually any kind of
task allocation problem: the demands
j can be the
abstract demand associated to some taskj, ij is
a response threshold of actori with respect to the
task-associated stimulussj. Finally,dzij is an abstract
distance betweeni and taskj which can, e.g., rep-
resent the ability or lack of ability ofi to deal with
taskj:i fi is not the most efﬁcient actor to perform
taskj, it will not respond preferentially tosj,b u t
if no other actor is in a position to respond, it will

===== PAGE 13 =====
M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871 863
eventually perform the task. It is certainly possible to
design a scheme in whichd can vary depending on
the efﬁciency ofi in performing taskj.
4. Cemetery formation and exploratory data
analysis
4.1. Cemetery organization
Chrétien [11] has performed intensive experiments
on the antLasius nigerto study the organization of
cemeteries. Other experiments on the antPheidole
pallidulaare also reported in [18], and it is now known
that many species actually organize a cemetery. The
phenomenon that is observed in these experiments is
the aggregation of dead bodies by workers. If dead
bodies, or more precisely items belonging to dead
bodies, are randomly distributed in space at the begin-
ning of the experiment, the workers will form clusters
within a few hours (see Fig. 9). If the experimental
arena is not sufﬁciently large, or if it contains spatial
heterogeneities, the clusters will be formed along
the borders of the arena or more generally along the
heterogeneities. The basic mechanism underlying this
type of aggregation phenomenon is an attraction be-
tween dead items mediated by the ant workers: small
clusters of items grow by attracting workers to deposit
more items. It is this positive feedback that leads to
Fig. 9. Real ants clustering behavior. The ﬁgures show four suc-
cessive pictures of the circular arena. From left to right and from
up to down: the initial state, after 3, 6 and 36 h, respectively.
the formation of larger and larger clusters. In this case
it is therefore the distribution of the clusters in the
environment that plays the role of stigmergic variable.
Deneubourg et al. [18] have proposed a model rely-
ing on biologically plausible assumptions to account
for the above-mentioned phenomenon of dead body
clustering in ants. The model, called in the follow-
ingbasic model(BM), relies on the general idea that
isolated items should be picked-up and dropped at
some other location where more items of that type are
present. Let us assume that there is only one type of
item in the environment. The probability for a ran-
domly moving ant that is currently not carrying an
item to pick-up an item is given by
p
p D
 k1
k1 Cf
2
; (12)
where f is the perceived fraction of items in the neigh-
borhood of the ant andk1 is the threshold constant:
forf k1,pp is close to 1 (i.e., the probability of
picking-up an item is high when there are not many
items in the neighborhood), andp
p is close to 0 if
f k1 (i.e., items are unlikely to be removed from
dense clusters). The probabilitypd for a randomly
moving loaded ant to deposit an item is given by
pd D
 f
k2 Cf
2
; (13)
where k2 is another threshold constant: forf k2,
pd is close to 0, whereas forf k2,pd is close to 1.
As expected, the pick-up and deposit behaviors obey
roughly opposite rules. The question is now to deﬁne
how f is evaluated. Deneubourg et al. [18], having
in mind a robotic implementation, moved away from
biological plausibility and assumed thatf is computed
using a short-term memory that each ant possesses: an
ant keeps track of the lastT time units, andf is simply
the numberN of items encountered during these last
T time units divided by the largest possible number
of items that can be encountered duringT time units.
If one assumes that only zero or one object can be
found within a time unit, thenf DN=T. Fig. 10
shows a simulation of this model: small evenly spaced
clusters emerge within a relatively short time and then
merge into fewer larger clusters. BM can be easily
extended to the case in which there are more than one
type of items. Consider, e.g., the case with two types

===== PAGE 14 =====
864 M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871
Fig. 10. Computer simulation of the clustering model. The ﬁg-
ures show four successive pictures of the simulated circular arena
(diameterD200 grid sites; total areaD31 416 sites). From left to
right and from up to down: the initial state, with 5000 items placed
randomly in the arena, the arena att D50 000;t D1 000 000 and
t D5 000 000. Parameters:T D50;k
1 D0:1;k2 D0:3, 10 ants.
Modiﬁed from [2].
a and b of items in the environment. The principle is
the same as before, but nowf is replaced byfa and
fb, the respective fractions of items of typesa and b
encountered during the lastT time units. Fig. 11 shows
a simulation of this sorting model with two items.
4.2. Exploratory data analysis
Lumer and Faieta [51] have generalized Deneubourg
et al.’s BM [18] to apply it to exploratory data anal-
ysis. The idea here is to deﬁne a “dissimilarity”d
(or distance) between objects in the space of object
attributes: for instance, in BM, two objectso
i and
oj can only be either similar or different, so that a
binary metric can be deﬁned, whered.oi;oj/ D0,
ifoi and oj are identical objects, andd.oi;oj/D1,
otherwise. Obviously, the very same idea can be
extended to include more complicated objects, i.e.,
objects with more attributes, and/or more complicated
distances. It is classical in data analysis to have to
deal with objects that can be described by a ﬁnite
number nof real-valued attributes, so that objects can
Fig. 11. Simulation of the sorting model. (a) Initial spatial dis-
tribution of 400 items of two types, denoted byand C,o na
100 100 grid; (b) spatial distribution of items att D500 000;
and (c) att D5 000 000. Parameters:T D50;k1 D0:1;k2 D0:3,
10 ants. (From [2]; reprinted by permission of Oxford University
Press.)

===== PAGE 15 =====
M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871 865
be seen as points inRn and d.oi;oj/is the Euclidean
norm (or any other usual metric, such ask::: k1).
The algorithm introduced by Lumer and Faieta [51]
(hereafter LF) consists in projecting the space of at-
tributes onto some lower dimensional space, so as
to make clusters appear with the following property:
intra-cluster distances (i.e, attribute distances between
objects within clusters) should be small with respect
to inter-cluster distances (i.e., attribute distances be-
tween objects that belong to different clusters). Such a
mapping should therefore keep some of the neighbor-
hood relationships present in the higher-dimensional
space (which is relatively easy since, for instance, any
continuous mapping can do the job) without creating
too many new neighbors inm dimensions,m<n ,
that would be false neighbors inndimensions (which
is much less trivial since projections tend to compress
information and may map several well-separated
points in then-dimensional space onto one single
point in them-dimensional subspace).
The LF algorithm works as follows. Let us assume
thatm D2; instead of embedding the set of objects
intoR
2, the LF algorithm approximates this embed-
ding by considering a grid, i.e., a subspace ofZ2.
Ants can directly perceive a surrounding region of area
s
2 − 1 (a square Neighss of ss sites surrounding
siter). Obviously, direct perception allows a more ef-
ﬁcient evaluation of the state of the neighborhood than
the memory-based procedure used in the BM: while
the BM was aimed to a robotic implementation, the
LF algorithm is to be implemented in a computer with
many less practical constraints. Letd.o
i;oj/ be the
distance between two objectsoi and oj in the space
of attributes. Let us also assume that an ant is located
at siter at timet, and ﬁnds an objecto
i at that site.
The local density of objects similar to typeoi at site
r is given by
f.oi/Dmax
8
<
:0; 1
s2
X
oj2Neighss.r/

1 − d.oi;oj/

9
=
; ;
(14)
f.oi/is a measure of the average similarity of object
oi with the other objectsoj present in its neighbor-
hood: this expression replaces the fractionf of similar
objects of the BM. The parameterdeﬁnes the scale
for dissimilarity: its value is important for it deter-
mines when two items should or should not be located
next to each other. For example, ifis too large, there
is no enough discrimination between different items,
leading to the formation of clusters composed of items
which should not belong to the same cluster. If, on the
other hand,is too small, distances between items in
attribute space are ampliﬁed to the point where items
which are relatively close in attribute space cannot be
clustered together because discrimination is too high.
Lumer and Faieta [51] deﬁne picking-up and dropping
probabilities as follows:
p
p.oi/D
 k1
k1 Cf.oi/
2
;
pd.oi/D
 2f.oi/ if f.oi/<k 2;
1i f f.oi/k2; (15)
where k1 and k2 are two constants that play a role
similar tok1 and k2 in the BM.
As an illustration, Lumer and Faieta [51] have used
a simple example where the attribute space isR2, and
the values of the two attributes for each object corre-
spond to its coordinates.x;y/ inR
2. Four clusters of
200 points each are generated in attribute space, with
xand ydistributed according to normal (or Gaussian)
distributions (see Fig. 12a for the scatter of points in
attribute space). The data points were then assigned
random locations on a 100100 grid, and the cluster-
ing algorithm was run with 10 ants. Fig. 12b–d shows
the system att D0;t D500 000 andt D1 000 000
(at each iteration, indexed by the countert, all ants
have made a random move and possibly performed an
action). Objects that are clustered together belong to
the same initial distribution, and objects that do not
belong to the same initial distribution are found in dif-
ferent clusters.
Because there are generally more clusters in the pro-
jected system than in the initial distribution, Lumer
and Faieta [51] have added three features to their
systems that help to solve this problem:
Ants with different moving speeds. Let the speedv
of an ant be distributed uniformly in [1;v
max ](vis
the number of grid units walked per time unit by
an ant along a given grid axis; the simulations use
v
max D6). The speedv inﬂuences the tendency of
an ant to either pick-up or drop an object through
the functionf.o
i/:

===== PAGE 16 =====
866 M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871
Fig. 12. Simulation of the clustering algorithm with 10 ants. (a) Distribution of points in “attribute space” — 4 clusters of
200 points each are generated in attribute space, withx and y distributed according to normal (or Gaussian) distributions
N.;/ :[ x / N.0:2;0:1/;y / N.0:2;0:1/], [x / N.0:8;0:1/;y / N.0:2;0:1/], [x / N.0:8;0:1/;y / N.0:8;0:1/], and
[x/N.0:2;0:1/;y /N.0:8;0:1/], for clusters 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively; (b) initial spatial distribution of the 800 items on a 100100 grid
(grid coordinates are scaled in the unit square); (c) distribution of the items att D500 000; and (d) distribution of the items att D1 000 000.
Items that belong to different clusters are represented by different symbols:;C;;. Parameters:k1 D0:1;k2 D0:15; D0:5;s2 D9.
(From [2]; reprinted by permission of Oxford University Press.)
f.oi/Dmax
8
<
:0; 1
s2
X
oj2Neighss.r/
2
41 − d.oi;oj/
.1 C..v− 1/=vmax //
3
5
9
=
; : (16)
Fast moving ants are not as selective as slow ants
in their estimation of the average similarity of an
object to its neighbors. The diversity of ants allows
to form the clusters over various scales simultane-
ously: fast ants form coarse clusters on large scales,
i.e., drop items approximately in the right coarse-
grained region, while slow ants take over at smaller
scales by placing objects with more accuracy.
A short-term memory. Ants can remember the lastm
items they have dropped along with their locations.
Each time an item is picked up, the ant compares the
properties of the item with those of them memo-
rized items and goes toward the location of the most
similar item instead of moving randomly. This be-
havior leads to a reduction in the number of statisti-
cally equivalent clusters, since similar items have a
lower probability of initiating independent clusters.
Behavioral switches. Ants can start to destroy clus-
ters if they have not performed any pick up or

===== PAGE 17 =====
M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871 867
deposit actions for a given number of time steps.
This procedure allows to “heat-up” the system to
escape local non-optimal conﬁgurations.
Fig. 13, which should be compared with Fig. 12d,
shows the system att D 1 000 000 in the case of
ants with different speeds and short term memory. The
effects of behavioral switches, not included here, can
be found in [51].
Lumer and Faieta [51] suggest that their algorithm
is halfway between a cluster analysis — insofar as el-
ements belonging to different concentration areas in
theirn-dimensional space end up in different clusters
— and a multi-dimensional scaling, in which an intra-
cluster structure is constructed. Note that in the present
example, the exact locations of the various clusters on
the two-dimensional space are arbitrary, whereas they
usually have a meaning in classical factorial analy-
sis. In a lot of cases, information about the locations
of the clusters is not necessary or useful (especially
in the context of textual databases), and relaxing the
global positioning constraints allows to speed-up the
clustering process signiﬁcantly.
Finally, we mention that the LF algorithm has been
successfully extended by Kuntz et al. [45–47] so that
it can be applied to a variety of graph drawing and
graph partitioning problems. In this case the objects
moved around by the artiﬁcial ants are projections on
Fig. 13. Extended clustering algorithm att D1 000 000. There
are 10 ants and 800 items on a 100100 grid (grid coordinates
are scaled in the unit square). Items that belong to different clus-
ters are represented by different symbols:;C;;. Parameters:
k
1 D0:1;k2 D0:15; D0:5;s2 D9;m D8;vmax D6. (From
[2]; reprinted by permission; © Oxford University Press.)
a spaceRn of the vertices of the graph, and the ants
goal is to ﬁnd conﬁgurations of these objects that ei-
ther minimize some objective function (in the graph
partitioning applications) or please the observer’s eye
(in the graph drawing applications).
5. Conclusions
In this paper we informally deﬁned anant al-
gorithmto be a multi-agent system inspired by the
observation of some real ant colony behavior exploit-
ing the stigmergic communication paradigm. In ant
algorithms stigmergic communication is implemented
by means of a stigmergic variable which takes dif-
ferent forms in the different applications: artiﬁcial
pheromone trail in shortest path problems, level of
nest energy in puck-foraging, level of customer de-
mand in the mailmen example, puck distribution in
robotic clustering, and the distribution of objects in
the lower-dimensional space in exploratory data anal-
ysis. Ant algorithms exhibit a number of interesting
properties like ﬂexibility (a colony responds to inter-
nal perturbations and external challenges), robustness
(tasks are completed even if some individuals fail),
decentralization (there exists no central control) and
self-organization (solutions to problems faced by a
colony are emergent rather than predeﬁned), which
make them well suited for the solution of problems
that are distributed in nature, dynamically changing,
and require built-in fault-tolerance.
Notwithstanding the number of interesting applica-
tions presented, a number of open problems need to
be addressed and solved before that of ant algorithms
becomes a mature ﬁeld. For example, it would be in-
teresting to give an answer to the following questions:
How can we deﬁne “methodologies” to program ant
algorithms? How do we deﬁne “artiﬁcial ants”? How
complex should they be? Should they all be identical?
What basic capabilities should they be given? Should
they be able to learn? Should they be purely reactive?
How local should their environment knowledge be?
Should they be able to communicate directly? If yes,
what type of information should they communicate?
What is also missing, similarly to what happens
with many other adaptive systems, is a theory that al-
lows to predict the system behavior as a function of
its parameters and of the characteristics of the appli-
cation domain. On this aspect, let us mention a couple

===== PAGE 18 =====
868 M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871
of recent and intriguing results: Gutjahr has recently
proved (see this special issue [40]) convergence to the
optimal solution for a particular version of AS, while
Wagner et al. (see this special issue [86]) have proved
an upper bound to the time necessary to an ant-like
agent to cover static and dynamic graphs.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Gianni Di Caro and to Thomas
Stützle for critical reading of a draft version of this ar-
ticle. Dr. Dorigo acknowledges support by the Belgian
Fund for Scientiﬁc Research (FNRS) of which he is a
Research Associate. Dr. Theraulaz was partially sup-
ported by a grant from the Groupement d’Intérêt Sci-
entiﬁque (GIS) Sciences de la Cognition and a grant
from the Conseil Régional Midi-Pyrénées.
References
[1] A. Bauer, B. Bullnheimer, R.F. Hartl, C. Strauss, An Ant
Colony Optimization approach for the single machine total
tardiness problem, in: Proceedings of the 1999 Congress on
Evolutionary Computation, IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, 1999,
pp. 1445–1450.
[2] E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo, G. Theraulaz, Swarm Intelligence:
From Natural to Artiﬁcial Systems, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 1999.
[3] E. Bonabeau, F. Henaux, S. Guérin, D. Snyers, P. Kuntz,
G. Theraulaz, Routing in telecommunication networks with
“Smart” ant-like agents, in: Proceedings of IATA’98,
Second International Workshop on Intelligent Agents for
Telecommunication Applications, Lectures Notes in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, V ol. 1437, Springer, Berlin, 1998.
[4] E. Bonabeau, A. Sobkowski, G. Theraulaz, J.-L. Deneubourg,
Adaptive task allocation inspired by a model of division
of labor in social insects, in: D. Lundh, B. Olsson, A.
Narayanan (Eds.), Biocomputation and Emergent Computing,
World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1997, pp. 36–45.
[5] E. Bonabeau, G. Theraulaz, J.-L. Deneubourg, Quantitative
study of the ﬁxed threshold model for the regulation of
division of labour in insect societies, Proc. Roy. Soc. London
B 263 (1996) 1565–1569.
[6] O.H. Bruinsma, An analysis of building behaviour
of the termite Macrotemes subhyalinus, Ph.D. Thesis,
Landbouwhogeschool, Wageningen, Netherlands, 1979.
[7] B. Bullnheimer, R.F. Hartl, C. Strauss, An improved
Ant System algorithm for the vehicle routing problem,
Technical Report POM-10/97, Institute of Management
Science, University of Vienna, Austria, 1997, Ann. Oper. Res.
89 (1999).
[8] B. Bullnheimer, R.F. Hartl, C. Strauss, A new rank-based
version of the Ant System: a computational study, Technical
Report POM-03/97, Institute of Management Science,
University of Vienna, Austria, 1997.
[9] B. Bullnheimer, R.F. Hartl, C. Strauss, Applying the Ant
System to the vehicle routing problem, in: S. V oß, S.
Martello, I.H. Osman, C. Roucairol (Eds.), Meta-heuristics:
Advances and Trends in Local Search Paradigms for
Optimization, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA,
1999, pp. 285–296.
[10] B. Bullnheimer, R.F. Hartl, C. Strauss, A new rank-based
version of the Ant System: a computational study, Central
Eur. J. Oper. Res. Econom. 7 (1) (1999) 25–38.
[11] L. Chrétien, Organisation spatiale du matériel provenant de
l’excavation du nid chez Messor Barbarus et des cadavres
d’ouvrières chez Lasius Niger, Ph.D. Thesis, Université Libre
de Bruxelles, Brussels, 1996.
[12] A. Colorni, M. Dorigo, V . Maniezzo, M. Trubian, Ant
System for job-shop scheduling, Belgian J. Oper. Res. Statist.
Comput. Sci. 34 (1994) 39–53.
[13] D. Costa, A. Hertz, Ants can colour graphs, J. Oper. Res.
Soc. 48 (1997) 295–305.
[14] M. den Besten, T. Stützle, M. Dorigo, Scheduling single
machines by ants, Technical Report IRIDIA/99-16, IRIDIA,
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium, 1999.
[15] J.-L. Deneubourg, Application de l’ordre par ﬂuctuations à
la description de certaines étapes de la construction du nid
chez les termites, Insectes Sociaux 24 (1977) 117–130.
[16] J.-L. Deneubourg, S. Aron, S. Goss, J.-M. Pasteels, The
self-organizing exploratory pattern of the Argentine ant, J.
Insect Behav. 3 (1990) 159–168.
[17] J.-L. Deneubourg, S. Goss, Collective patterns and decision
making, Ethol. Ecol. Evol. 1 (1989) 295–311.
[18] J.-L. Deneubourg, S. Goss, N. Franks, A. Sendova-hanks,
C. Detrain, L. Chrétien, The dynamics of collective
sorting: robot-like ants and ant-like robots, in: J.-A. Meyer,
S.W. Wilson (Eds.), Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Simulation of Adaptive Behavior: From
Animals to Animats, MIT Press/Bradford Books, Cambridge,
MA, 1991, pp. 356–363.
[19] J.-L. Deneubourg, S. Goss, J.M. Pasteels, D. Fresneau, J.-P.
Lachaud, Self-organization mechanisms in ant societies II:
learning in foraging and division of labour, Experientia Suppl.
54 (1987) 177–196.
[20] G. Di Caro, M. Dorigo, AntNet: a mobile agents approach
to adaptive routing, Technical Report IRIDIA/97-12, IRIDIA,
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium, 1997.
[21] G. Di Caro, M. Dorigo, AntNet: distributed stigmergetic
control for communications networks, J. Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Res. 9 (1998) 317–365.
[22] G. Di Caro, M. Dorigo, Extending AntNet for best-effort
quality-of-service routing, in: ANTS’98 — From Ant
Colonies to Artiﬁcial Ants: First International Workshop on
Ant Colony Optimization, October 15–16, 1998, Unpublished
presentation (http://iridia.ulb.ac.be/ants98/ants98.html).
[23] G. Di Caro, M. Dorigo, Two ant colony algorithms for
best-effort routing in datagram networks, in: Proceedings

===== PAGE 19 =====
M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871 869
of the 10th IASTED International Conference on Parallel
and Distributed Computing and Systems (PDCS’98),
IASTED/ACTA Press, Anheim, 1998, pp. 541–546.
[24] M. Dorigo, Optimization, learning and natural algorithms,
Ph.D. Thesis, Dipartimento di Elettronica, Politecnico di
Milano, Italy, 1992 (in Italian).
[25] M. Dorigo, G. Di Caro, The ant colony optimization
meta-heuristic, in: D. Come, M. Dorigo, F. Glover (Eds.),
New Ideas in Optimization, McGraw-Hill, London, UK, 1999,
pp. 11–32.
[26] M. Dorigo, G. Di Caro, L.M. Gambardella, Ant algorithms
for discrete optimization, Artiﬁcial Life 5 (2) (1999) 137–172.
[27] M. Dorigo, L.M. Gambardella, Ant colonies for the traveling
salesman problem, BioSystems 43 (1997) 73–81.
[28] M. Dorigo, L.M. Gambardella, Ant colony system: a
cooperative learning approach to the traveling salesman
problem, IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 1 (1) (1997) 53–66.
[29] M. Dorigo, V . Maniezzo, A. Colorni, Positive feedback as
a search strategy, Technical Report 91-016, Dipartimento di
Elettronica, Politecnico di Milano, Italy, 1991.
[30] M. Dorigo, V . Maniezzo, A. Colorni, The ant system:
optimization by a colony of cooperating agents, IEEE Trans.
Systems Man Cybernet. B 26 (1) (1996) 29–41.
[31] J.-H. Fabre, Souvenirs Entomologiques, Librairie Delagrave,
Paris, 1925.
[32] L.M. Gambardella, M. Dorigo, Ant-Q: a reinforcement
learning approach to the traveling salesman problem, in:
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Machine
Learning, ML-95, Morgan Kaufmann, Palo Alto, CA, 1995,
pp. 252–260.
[33] L.M. Gambardella, M. Dorigo, Solving symmetric and
asymmetric TSPs by ant colonies, in: Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Evolutionary Computation, ICEC’96,
IEEE Press, New York, 1996, pp. 622–627.
[34] L.M. Gambardella, M. Dorigo, HAS-SOP: an hybrid Ant
System for the sequential ordering problem, Technical Report
IDSIA-11-97, IDSIA, Lugano, Switzerland, 1997.
[35] L.M. Gambardella, È. Taillard, G. Agazzi, MACS-VRPTW: a
multiple ant colony system for vehicle routing problems with
time windows, in: D. Corne, M. Dorigo, F. Glover (Eds.), New
Ideas in Optimization, McGraw-Hill, London, UK, 1999, pp.
63–76.
[36] L.M. Gambardella, È.D. Taillard, M. Dorigo, Ant colonies
for the QAP, Technical Report IDSIA-4-97, IDSIA, Lugano,
Switzerland, 1997.
[37] L.M. Gambardella, È.D. Taillard, M. Dorigo, Ant colonies
for the quadratic assignment problem, J. Oper. Res. Soc. 50
(1999) 167–176.
[38] S. Goss, S. Aron, J.L. Deneubourg, J.M. Pasteels, Self-
organized shortcuts in the Argentine ant, Naturwis-
senschaften 76 (1989) 579–581.
[39] P.P. Grassé, La reconstruction du nid et les coordina-
tions interindividuelles chezbellicositermes natalensis
et cubitermes sp. La théorie de la stigmergie: essai
d’interprétation du comportement des termites constructeurs,
Insectes Sociaux 6 (1959) 41–81.
[40] W.J. Gutjahr, A Graph-based Ant System and its convergence,
this issue, Future Generation Comput. Systems 16 (2000)
873–888.
[41] M. Heusse, S. Guérin, D. Snyers, P. Kuntz, Adaptive
agent-driven routing and load balancing in communication
networks, Adv. Complex Systems 1 (1998) 234–257.
[42] B. Hölldobler, E.O. Wilson, The Ants, Springer, Berlin, 1990.
[43] B. Hölldobler, E.O. Wilson, Journey to the Ants: A Story of
Scientiﬁc Exploration, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1994.
[44] M.J.B. Krieger, J.-B. Billeter, The call of duty: self-organized
task allocation in a population of up to twelve mobile robots,
Robot. Autonomous Systems 30 (2000) 65–84.
[45] P. Kuntz, P. Layzell, A new stochastic approach to ﬁnd clusters
in vertex set of large graphs with applications to partitioning in
VLSI technology, Technical Report LIASC, Ecole Nationale
Supérieure des Télécommunications de Bretagne, 1995.
[46] P. Kuntz, P. Layzell, D. Snyers, A colony of ant-like agents for
partitioning in VLSI technology, in: P. Husbands, I. Harvey
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Fourth European Conference
on Artiﬁcial Life, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1997, pp.
417–424.
[47] P. Kuntz, D. Snyers, New results on an ant-based heuristic for
highlighting the organization of large graphs, in: Proceedings
of the 1999 Congress or Evolutionary Computation, IEEE
Press, Piscataway, NJ, 1999, pp. 1451–1458.
[48] G. Leguizamón, Z. Michalewicz, A new version of Ant
System for subset problems, in: Proceedings of the
1999 Congress on Evolutionary Computation, IEEE Press,
Piscataway, NJ, 1999, pp. 1459–1464.
[49] Y .-C. Liang, A.E. Smith, An Ant System approach to
redundancy allocation, in: Proceedings of the 1999 Congress
on Evolutionary Computation, IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ,
1999, pp. 1478–1484.
[50] S. Lin, Computer solutions for the traveling salesman
problem, Bell Systems J. 44 (1965) 2245–2269.
[51] E. Lumer, B. Faieta, Diversity and adaptation in populations
of clustering ants, in: J.-A. Meyer, S.W. Wilson (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Simulation of Adaptive Behavior: From Animals to Animats,
V ol. 3, MIT Press/Bradford Books, Cambridge, MA, 1994,
pp. 501–508.
[52] M. Maeterlinck, The Life of the White Ant, George Allen &
Unwin, London, 1927.
[53] V . Maniezzo, Exact and approximate nondeterministic
tree-search procedures for the quadratic assignment problem,
Technical Report CSR 98-1, Scienze dell’Informazione,
Universita di Bologna, Sede di Cesena, Italy, 1998.
[54] V . Maniezzo, A. Carbonaro, An ANTS heuristic for the
frequency assignment problem, Technical Report CSR 98-4,
Scienze dell’Informazione, Università di Bologna, Sede di
Cesena, Italy, 1998.
[55] V . Maniezzo, A. Carbonaro, An ANTS heuristic for the
frequency assignment problem, Future Generation Comput.
Systems, this issue.
[56] V . Maniezzo, A. Colorni, The Ant System applied to the
quadratic assignment problem, IEEE Trans. Knowledge Data
Eng. 11 (5) (1999) 769–778.

===== PAGE 20 =====
870 M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871
[57] V . Maniezzo, A. Colorni, M. Dorigo, The Ant System
applied to the quadratic assignment problem, Technical
Report IRIDIA/94-28, IRIDIA, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Belgium, 1994.
[58] R. Michel, M. Middendorf, An island model based Ant
System with lookahead for the shortest supersequence
problem, in: A.E. Eiben, T. Back, M. Schoenauer, H.-P.
Schwefel (Eds.), Proceedings of PPSN-V , Fifth International
Conference on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature,
Springer, Berlin, Germany, 1998, pp. 692–701.
[59] R. Michel, M. Middendorf, An ACO algorithm for the shortest
supersequence problem, in: D. Come, M. Dorigo, F. Glover
(Eds.), New Ideas in Optimization, McGraw-Hill, London,
UK, 1999, pp. 51–61.
[60] F. Mondada, E. Franzi, P. Ienne, Mobile robot miniaturization:
a tool for investigation in control algorithms, in: Proceedings
of the Third International Symposium on Simulation on
Experimental Robotics (ISER’93), 1993, pp. 501–513.
[61] G. Navarro Varela, M.C. Sinclair, Ant colony optimisation for
virtual-wavelength-path routing and wavelength allocation,
in: Proceedings of the 1999 Congress on Evolutionary
Computation, IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, 1999, pp.
1809–1816.
[62] G.F. Oster, Modeling social insect populations. Part I:
Ergonomics of foraging and population growth in bumblebees,
Am. Nat. 110 (1977) 215–245.
[63] G.F. Oster, E.O. Wilson, Caste and Ecology in the Social
Insects, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1978.
[64] R.C. Plowright, C.M.S. Plowright, Elitism in social insects: a
positive feedback model, in: R.L. Jeanne (Ed.), Interindividual
Behavior Variability in Social Insects, Westview Press,
Boulder, CO, 1988.
[65] H. Ramalhinho Lourenço, D. Serra, Adaptive approach
heuristics for the generalized assignment problem, Technical
Report EWP Series No. 304, Department of Economics and
Management, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, 1998.
[66] G.E. Robinson, Modulation of alarm pheromone perception
in the honey bee: evidence for division of labour based on
hormonally regulated response thresholds, J. Comput. Physiol.
A 160 (1987) 613–619.
[67] G.E. Robinson, Regulation of division of labor in insect
societies, Ann. Rev. Entomol. 37 (1992) 637–665.
[68] R. Schoonderwoerd, O. Holland, J. Bruten, Ant-like agents
for load balancing in telecommunications networks, in:
Proceedings of the First International Conference on
Autonomous Agents, ACM, New York, 1997, pp. 209–216.
[69] R. Schoonderwoerd, O. Holland, J. Bruten, L. Rothkrantz,
Ant-based load balancing in telecommunications networks,
Adaptive Behav. 5 (2) (1996) 169–207.
[70] T.D. Seeley, Adaptive signiﬁcance of the age polyethism
schedule in honey bee colonies, Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 11
(1982) 287–293.
[71] T. Stützle, An ant approach to the ﬂow shop problem,
Technical Report AIDA-97-07, FG Intellektik, FB Informatik,
TH Darmstadt, September 1997.
[72] T. Stützle, Local search algorithms for combinatorial
problems: analysis, improvements, and new applications,
Ph.D. Thesis, Fachbereich Informatik, TU Darmstadt,
Germany, 1998.
[73] T. Stützle, M. Dorigo, ACO Algorithms for the Traveling
Salesman Problem, in: P. Neittaanmäki, J. Periaux, K.
Miettinen, M.M. Mäkelä (Eds.), Evolutionary Algorithms in
Engineering and Computer Science, Wiley, Chichester, UK,
1999, pp. 163–183.
[74] T. Stützle, H. Hoos,MAX -MIN Ant System for the
quadratic assignment problem, Technical Report AIDA-97-4,
FG Intellektik, TH Darmstadt, July 1997.
[75] T. Stützle, H. Hoos, TheMAX -MIN Ant System and
local search for the traveling salesman problem, in:
T. Bäck, Z. Michalewicz, X. Yao (Eds.), Proceedings
of IEEE-ICEC-EPS’97, IEEE International Conference on
Evolutionary Computation and Evolutionary Programming
Conference, IEEE Press, New York, 1997, pp. 309–314.
[76] T. Stützle, H. Hoos, Improvements on the Ant System:
introducingMAX -MIN Ant System, in: Proceedings of the
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks and
Genetic Algorithms, Springer, Vienna, 1998, pp. 245–249.
[77] T. Stützle, H. Hoos,MAX -MIN Ant System and local
search for combinatorial optimization problems, in: S. V oß, S.
Martello, I.H. Osman, C. Roucairol (Eds.), Meta-heuristics:
Advances and Trends in Local Search Paradigms for
Optimization, Kluwer Academic, Boston, MA, 1999, pp.
313–329.
[78] T. Stützle, H. Hoos,MAX -MIN Ant System, Future
Generation Comput. Systems, this issue.
[79] D. Subramanian, P. Druschel, J. Chen, Ants and reinforcement
learning: a case study in routing in dynamic networks, in:
Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, Morgan Kaufmann, Palo Alto, CA, 1997, pp.
832–838.
[80] G. Theraulaz, E. Bonabeau, A brief history of stigmergy,
Artiﬁcial Life 5 (1999) 97–116.
[81] G. Theraulaz, E. Bonabeau, J.-L. Deneubourg, Threshold
reinforcement and the regulation of division of labour in insect
societies, Proc. Roy. Soc. London B 265 (1998) 327–332.
[82] G. Theravlaz, E. Bonabeav, J.-L. Denevbourg, The
mechanisms and rules of coordinated building in social
insects, in: C. Detrain, J.-L. Deneubourg, J.M. Pasteels (Eds.),
Information Processing in social Insects, Birkhäuser Verlag,
Basel, Switzerland, 1999, pp. 309–330.
[83] G. Theraulaz, S. Goss, J. Gervet, J.-L. Deneubourg, Task
differentiation in Polistes wasp colonies: a model for
self-organizing groups of robots, in: J.-A. Meyer, S.W. Wilson
(Eds.), Proceedings of the First International Conference on
Simulation of Adaptive Behavior: From Animals to Animats,
MIT Press/Bradford Books, Cambridge, MA, 1991, pp.
346–355.
[84] R. van der Put, Routing in the fax factory using mobile
agents, Technical Report R&D-SV-98-276, KPN Research,
The Netherlands, 1998.
[85] R. van der Put, L. Rothkrantz, Routing in packet switched
networks using agents, Simulation Practice and Theory
(1999), in press.

===== PAGE 21 =====
M. Dorigo et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 16 (2000) 851–871 871
[86] I. Wagner, Lindenbaum, F. Bruckstein, ANTS: Agents on
Networks, Trees, and Subgraphs, this issue, Future Generation
Computer Systems 16 (2000) 915–926.
[87] B. Werber, Les fourmis, Albin Michel, 1991 (Engl. Trans.,
Empire of the Ants, Bantam Books, New York, 1996).
[88] T. White, B. Pagurek, F. Oppacher, Connection management
using adaptive mobile agents, in: H.R. Arabnia (Ed.),
Proceedings of the International Conference on Parallel and
Distributed Processing Techniques and Applications (PDPTA
’98), CSREA Press, 1998, pp. 802–809.
[89] E.O. Wilson, Sociobiology, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1975.
[90] E.O. Wilson, The relation between caste ratios and division of
labour in the antGenus Pheidole(hymenoptera: Formicidae),
Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 16 (1984) 89–98.
Marco Dorigo was born in Milan, Italy,
in 1961. He received his Ph.D. degree in
information and systems electronic engi-
neering in 1992 from Politecnico di Mi-
lano, Milan, Italy, and the title of Agrégé
de l’Enseignement Supérieur in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, from the Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Belgium, in 1995. From 1992
to 1993 he was a research fellow at the
International Computer Science Institute
of Berkeley, CA. In 1993 he was a NATO-CNR fellow, and from
1994 to 1996 a Marie Curie fellow at the IRIDIA laboratory of
the Université Libre de Bruxelles. Since 1996 he holds a tenured
research position in the same laboratory as a Research Associate
of the FNRS, the Belgian National Fund for Scientiﬁc Research.
His main current research interest is in ant algorithms, a novel re-
search area initiated by his seminal doctoral work. Other research
interests include evolutionary computation, autonomous robotics,
and reinforcement learning. He is the author of a book on learning
robots and of a book on swarm intelligence, the editor of three
books on evolutionary computation and other modern heuristic
techniques, and of more than 50 scientiﬁc articles published in
international Journals and conference proceedings. Dr. Dorigo is
an Associate Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics, the IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Com-
putation, the Journal of Heuristics, and the Journal of Cognitive
Systems Research. He is a member of the Editorial Board of the
Evolutionary Computation journal, the Adaptive Behavior journal,
and the Journal of Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines.
He was awarded the 1996 Italian Prize for Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Eric Bonabeau is the Managing Director
of EuroBios, a Paris-based start-up com-
pany applying complexity science to busi-
ness problems. Prior to this appointment,
he was the Director of Research at France
Telecom, R&D Engineer with Cadence
Design Systems, and research fellow at the
Santa Fe Institute. He received his Ph.D.
in theoretical physics from the University
of Orsay, France, and engineering degrees
from Ecole Polytechnique and Ecole National Supérieure des Télé-
communications (France). The Editor-in-Chief of Advances in
Complex Systems, Dr. Bonabeau is the co-author of three books
and a 100 scientiﬁc articles.
Guy Theraulaz received an M.S. degree
in behavioral neurosciences in 1986, and
a Ph.D. in ethology in 1991 from the
Provence University, Marseille, France. He
is a Research Associate with the French
CNRS, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientiﬁque, and is currently working
at the Ethology and Animal Cognition
Laboratory, Paul Sabatier University in
Toulouse, where he is the Head of the Col-
lective Intelligence in Social Insects and Artiﬁcial Systems group.
His research interests are collective behaviors in animal societies,
modeling collective phenomena and designing distributed adaptive
algorithms inspired by social insects. In 1996 he was awarded the
bronze medal of the CNRS for his work on Swarm Intelligence.