

===== PAGE 1 =====
.................... ....................... ...................
Effective leadership and decision-
making in animal groups on the move
Iain D. Couzin1,2, Jens Krause3, Nigel R. Franks4 & Simon A. Levin1
1Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA
2Department of Zoology, South Parks Road, University of Oxford, Oxford
OX1 3PS, UK
3Centre for Biodiversity and Conservation, School of Biology, University of Leeds,
Leeds LS2 9JT, UK
4Centre for Behavioural Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of
Bristol, Woodland Road, Bristol BS8 1UG, UK
.............................................................................................................................................................................
For animals that forage or travel in groups, making movement
decisions often depends on social interactions among group
members1,2. However, in many cases, few individuals have perti-
nent information, such as knowledge about the location of a food
source
3,4, or of a migration route 5–9. Using a simple model we
show how information can be transferred within groups both
without signalling and when group members do not know which
individuals, if any, have information. W e reveal that the larger the
group the smaller the proportion of informed individuals needed
to guide the group, and that only a very small proportion of
informed individuals is required to achieve great accuracy. W e
also demonstrate how groups can make consensus decisions,
even though informed individuals do not know whether they are
in a majority or minority, how the quality of their information
compares with that of others, or even whether there are any other
informed individuals. Our model provides new insights into the
mechanisms of effective leadership and decision-making in
biological systems.
Primary questions concerning the mechanism of information
transfer in groups include how uninformed individuals recognize
those that are informed, whether such recognition is actually
necessary, and how groups can come to a collective decision when
informed individuals differ in preference
10. It is known that several
animal species have evolved speciﬁc recruitment signals that help
guide conspeciﬁcs. Most famous in this context is the waggle-dance
of the honeybee that recruits hive members to visit food
sources
5,7,8,11. Furthermore, valuable experience may be correlated
with age or dominance 1,2, which can presumably be estimated by
conspeciﬁcs of some species 12. However, it remains questionable
whether such explanations hold when migrating groups of ﬁsh,
ungulates, insects and birds are considered, where crowding limits
the range over which individuals can detect one another
1,2.I n
pelagic ﬁsh schools, for example, individuals are usually less than
one body-length apart
13. Although it is likely that some species have
a genetically determined propensity to migrate in a general direc-
tion
14,15, or respond to abiotic cues such as thermal gradients that
may aid migration16,17, it is likely for many species that experienced
group members play an important role in guiding those that are less
experienced or inexperienced. Relatively few informed individuals
within ﬁsh schools are known to be able to inﬂuence the foraging
behaviour of the group
3 and the ability of a school to navigate towards
a target4. Similarly, very few individuals (approximately 5%) within
honeybee swarms can guide the group to a new nest site 7.
Furthermore, for some animal groups such as large insect swarms
or ﬁsh schools, it may be unreasonable to assume that group
members have the capacity for individual recognition. Here we
address two fundamental issues, both occurring in the absence of
complex signalling mechanisms and when it is not possible for
group members to establish who has and has not got information.
First, how information about the location of resources, or of a
migration route, can be transferred within groups; and second, how
individuals can achieve a consensus when informed individuals
differ in their preferences.
We take into account the ability of grouping individuals to
modify their motion on the basis of that of local neighbours (social
interactions)
2,18,19. Groups are composed of N individuals. Each
individual with position vector ci(t), direction vector vi(t), and
speed si, attempts to maintain a minimum distancea between itself
i and others j at all times by turning away from neighbours within
that range
diðt þ DtÞ¼ 2
j–i
X cjðtÞ 2ciðtÞ
jðcjðtÞ 2ciðtÞÞj ð1Þ
where di represents a desired direction of travel. This simulates
individuals acting to maintain personal space and to avoid col-
lisions1,2. Avoidance is the highest priority. If neighbours are not
detected within this region then the individual will tend to become
attracted towards, and aligned with 1,2,11,13,18, j neighbours within a
local interaction range r:
diðt þ DtÞ¼
j–i
X cjðtÞ 2ciðtÞ
jðcjðtÞ 2ciðtÞÞj þ
j¼1
X vjðtÞ
jvjðtÞj ð2Þ
Here di(t þ Dt) is converted to the corresponding unit vector ^diðt þ
DtÞ¼ diðt þ DtÞ=jdiðt þ DtÞj:
T o incorporate the inﬂuence of informed group members, a
proportion of the individuals p are given information about a
preferred direction (simulated as a unit vector g) representing, for
example, the direction to a known resource, or a segment of a
migration route. All other individuals are naive and have no
preference to move in any particular direction, and are also not
informed as to which individuals within the group have infor-
mation and which do not. Informed individuals balance the
inﬂuence of their preferred direction and their social interactions
with weighting term q, and replacing ^diðt þ DtÞ by di
0
ðt þ DtÞ;
where:
di
0
ðt þ DtÞ¼
^diðt þ DtÞþ qgi
j ^diðt þ DtÞþ qgij
ð3Þ
If q ¼ 0, vector gi has no inﬂuence and individuals have no desire to
move in any speciﬁc direction. As q approaches 1, individuals tend
to balance their preference to move in direction gi with their desire
to maintain social interactions with group members. Asq exceeds 1,
individuals are more heavily inﬂuenced by their preferred direction
gi than by their neighbours (see Methods section for details of the
model).
The accuracy of the group, and hence the quality of information
transfer, can be quantiﬁed as the normalized angular deviation 20 of
group direction (see Methods) around the preferred direction g,
with a minimum value of 0 and maximum of 1.
For a given group size we found that the accuracy of group
motion (in a preferred direction) increased asymptotically as the
proportion of informed individuals increased. Furthermore, as
group size became larger this relationship became increasingly
nonlinear (Fig. 1a), meaning that the larger the group, the smaller
the proportion of informed individuals needed to guide the group
with a given accuracy. Thus for sufﬁciently large groups only a very
small proportion of informed individuals is needed to achieve close
to maximal accuracy. For animal groups such as migrating honey-
bee colonies, there are likely to be costs associated with increasing
the proportion of scouts (informed individuals) within the colony
owing to the time taken to recruit others via the waggle-dance
5–9,11,
and for scouts to learn essential navigational skills7,8. Thus, we may
expect colonies to have evolved such that they have effectively
reached the asymptote of accuracy (Fig. 1a) and we predict that
they would achieve little beneﬁt in having larger scout populations.
The inﬂuence of the weighting of preferred direction q was of
least importance if the proportion of informed individuals is small
letters to nature
NATURE | VOL 433 | 3 FEBRUARY 2005 | www.nature.com/nature 513©  2005 Nature Publishing Group 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
or large (Fig. 2a, c, d). At intermediate values, however, q becomes
strongly positively correlated with group accuracy (Fig. 2b). This
corresponds to the region in Fig. 1 where the rate of increase in
accuracy reaches its asymptote. There is a cost to increasing q for
these intermediate values ofp, however, because there exists a trade-
off between the accuracy of group motion and the probability that
the group will fragment (Fig. 2b). Lack of group cohesion would
clearly be detrimental to honeybees6–8 or obligate schooling ﬁsh1,2,13
and there is experimental evidence that such a trade-off also occurs
in other animal groups where social learning of routes depends on
the ability of informed individuals to maintain social interactions
with those that are naive
4.
Informed individuals within a group may differ in their preferred
direction, however, due to differences in experience or moti-
vation1,5–11 . Groups of animals often have to make collective
decisions, such as to move together to a speciﬁc resource, such as
a nest site1,5–9 or food source2,4. The means by which such decisions
can be made is very poorly understood, especially in the case of large
groups and when individuals are not capable of knowing whether
they are in a majority or minority, or how the quality of their
information compares with that of others, or even whether there are
any other individuals in the population with information. T o
investigate this we created two subsets of informed individual,
each having its own directional preference.
If the number of individuals that exhibit each preference is equal,
the direction of group motion depends on the degree to which the
preferred preferences differ: as this difference increases, groups
change from moving in the average preferred direction of all
informed individuals to selecting randomly one of the two preferred
directions (Fig. 3A, a). If the number of individuals exhibiting one
of the preferences is increased, however (Fig. 3A, b and c), the group
will (given the appropriate difference in preference, Fig. 3A, a) select
collectively the direction preferred by the majority, even if that
majority is small (Fig. 3A, b).
This ability of a group to average preferences when differences are
relatively small
21 but to achieve a consensus for the majority option
when differences are large is likely to be important in many animal
groups, especially if the point at which this transition occurs can be
tuned. T o achieve this tuning we introduced a simple feedback on
the weighting of the preferred direction q. If, in a given time step,
informed individuals ﬁnd themselves moving in a similar direction
(here within a 20-degree arc) to their preferred direction, q is
reinforced (by qinc,u pt oam a x i m u m , qmax), otherwise it is
reduced (by qdec, to a minimum of 0). Such a feedback loop allows
consensus decisions (as opposed to averaging) for smaller differ-
ences in preferred direction (Fig. 3B, C). Figure 3B, C shows that the
transition to consensus decision-making occurs for small changes in
the number of individuals in each subset and that the inﬂuence of
the minority subset decreases rapidly as the difference in size of the
informed subsets increases.
This decision-making mechanism also allows discrimination
with respect to quality of information. For example, if there is no
difference in the size of the two subsets of informed individual, but
there exists a difference in their ability to correctly determine their
Figure 1Group accuracy, and shape, as a function of the proportion of informed
individuals p, for different group sizesN. The initial increase in accuracy as a function ofp
(a) is associated with the group becoming elongated asp increases (b). Informed
individuals tend to occupy a frontal position within the group. The elongation of the group
then decreases asp increases further and an increasingly large proportion of the group
have knowledge of the directional vectorg. 400 replicates,q ¼ 0.5; a ¼ 1, r ¼ 6,
g ¼ 0, Dt ¼ 0.2 s,v ¼ 2, s i ¼ a s21 corresponding to ﬁsh2,19.
Figure 2The inﬂuence of the weighting of preferred direction. The accuracy of group
motion (black circles) and probability of group fragmentation (red triangles) as a function
of weighting q and the proportion of informed individualsp. a, p ¼ 0.02 (1 individual);
b, p ¼ 0.1 (5 individuals);c, p ¼ 0.2 (10 individuals);d, p ¼ 0.5 (25 individuals).
Parameters as for Fig. 1,N ¼ 50.
letters to nature
NATURE | VOL 433 | 3 FEBRUARY 2005 | www.nature.com/nature514 ©  2005 Nature Publishing Group 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
preferred direction, the group can select collectively the direction
associated with least error (Fig. 4, see Methods for details).
Our model demonstrates that efﬁcient transfer of information,
and decision-making, can occur within animal groups in the
absence of explicit signals or complex mechanisms for information
transfer. This means that informed and naive individuals do not
have to be able to recognize each other and that leadership can
emerge as a function of information differences among members of
a population, and is therefore transferable. No inherent differences
between individuals (such as dominance due to larger body size)
need to be invoked to explain leadership, although these properties
can also inﬂuence group motion
2,18. Furthermore, the mechanism
of coordination we propose here requires only limited cognitive
ability, and demonstrates that individuals can respond spon-
taneously to those that have information. This is important to
our understanding of group foraging, social learning, migration and
navigation, and may provide new design protocols for information
transfer among grouping robots. A
Methods
Motion in animals is subject to random inﬂuences (for example, sensory/movement
error). This is simulated by modifying ^diðt þ DtÞ or di
0
ðt þ DtÞ; for uninformed and
informed individuals, respectively, by rotating it by a random angle taken from a circular-
wrapped gaussian distribution, centred on 0, with standard deviation j ¼ 0.01 radians
(see ‘Uncertainty of information’ , below) resulting in vectordi
00
ðt þ DtÞ: Individuals can
turn through an angle of, at most,vDt radians towards their desired direction in timeDt;i f
the angle between vi(t)a n ddi
00
ðt þ DtÞ is less than vDt, they achieve alignment with their
desired vector, v iðt þ DtÞ¼ di
00
ðt þ DtÞ; otherwise they turn vDt towards it. The new
position vector of individual i is then given byciðt þ DtÞ¼ ciðtÞþ v iðt þ DtÞDtsi; where si
is the speed of individual i.
Group size
Group sizes here are comparable to the size of schools, ﬂocks or herds, of many
species1–4,13,19, but smaller than large aggregates such as honeybee colonies7,8, owing to the
nonlinear increase in computer processing time required as N increases. Our results,
however, are likely to be independent of absolute group size, within the constraints of
maintaining cohesion of group members 22. T o automatically test whether groups
remained cohesive we used the equivalence class technique described in refs 18, 19.
 
Figure 3Collective selection of group direction when informed individuals differ in
preference. Normalized probability distribution (proportion of maximum) of group direction
for groups containing two subsets (with directional preferencess1 and s2, and of sizesn1
and n2, respectively) of informed individual within each group, each with its own
directional preference:s1 ¼ 0 degrees (white dotted line) whereass2 ¼ 0–180 degrees
(2,000 replicates per 10-degree interval). Total group sizeN ¼ 100 (parameters as for
Fig. 1;q, q max ¼ 0.4). We show the large inﬂuence of slightly changingn1 and n2 on
group direction. Ina, the ﬁrst column,n1 ¼ n2 (A, B ¼ 5; C ¼ 10, demonstrating
consistency at larger values ofp). Inb, the second column,n1 is increased by 1, whereas
in c, column 3,n1 is increased by 1 andn2 decreased by 1 (to allow direct comparison
with the ﬁrst column).B and C include feedback.A, a, n1 ¼ 5, n2 ¼ 5; A, b, n1 ¼ 6,
n2 ¼ 5; A, c, n1 ¼ 6, n2 ¼ 4; B, a–c, n1 and n2 as for A, a–c, respectively.
C, a, n1 ¼ 10, n2 ¼ 10; C, b, n1 ¼ 11, n2 ¼ 10. C, c, n1 ¼ 11, n2 ¼ 9. ForB and C
q inc ¼ 0.012, q dec ¼ 0.0008. Solid white lines are for reference only, representing the
direction of the average vectorg of all informed individuals (with constantq).
Figure 4Discrimination between two directions (s1 ¼ 0; s2 ¼ 100 degrees) based on
information quality (x, see Methods). Parameters as for Fig. 3.n1 ¼ 10, n2 ¼ 10.
Subset 2 has uncertain information whenx . 0.
letters to nature
NATURE | VOL 433 | 3 FEBRUARY 2005 | www.nature.com/nature 515©  2005 Nature Publishing Group 
 

===== PAGE 4 =====
Group direction
T o quantify group directionh we create a vector extending from the group’s centroid
calculated at time tfDt 2 50Dt to the centroid calculated at tfDt, where tf, the ﬁnal time
step, is 2,500. In Figs 1 and 2 we calculated the mean angular deviations for 400 replicates,
equivalent to calculating the linear standard deviation 20, which we normalized so that its
minimum value is 0, corresponding to no information transfer (groups move in random
directions), and its maximum value is 1, corresponding to the motion of the simulated
groups always being exactly aligned with g.
Elongation
Elongation was measured by creating a bounding box around the group aligned with the
direction of travel and calculating the ratio of the length of the axis aligned with the group
direction, to that perpendicular to group direction. This value is 1 when both axes are
identical, .1 as the group becomes more elongated in the direction of travel, and,1a si t
becomes elongated perpendicular to the direction of travel.
Uncertainty of information
Individuals may also not have perfect knowledge about their preferred directiong, and this
can be simulated for each individuali at the start of the simulation by rotating by the same
type of circular-wrapped gaussian distribution with standard deviationg, resulting in vector
gi.C h a n g i n gg changes our results quantitatively, but not qualitatively, within the upper
limits imposed by groups being able to maintain cohesion (see Supplementary Fig. 1).
To simulate a difference in the ability of informed individuals, within the same group,
to correctly determine their preferred direction, g is rotated for p/2 individuals (s2)b y
gaussian-distributed angle, with standard deviation x radians (creating gi, as above) at the
start of the simulation (see Fig. 4).
Starting conditions
Each simulation run was started with randomized individual positions and orientations.
Received 10 August; accepted 30 November 2004; doi:10.1038/nature03236.
1. Krause, J. & Ruxton, G. D. Living in Groups 84–85, 137–143 (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 2002).
2. Couzin, I. D. & Krause, J. Self-organization and collective behaviour in vertebrates. Adv. Study Behav.
32, 1–75 (2003).
3. Reebs, S. G. Can a minority of informed leaders determine the foraging movements of a ﬁsh shoal?
Anim. Behav. 59, 403–409 (2000).
4. Swaney, W., Kendal, J., Capon, H., Brown, C. & Laland, K. N. Familiarity facilitates social learning of
foraging behaviour in the guppy. Anim. Behav. 62, 591–598 (2001).
5. Franks, N. R., Pratt, S. C., Mallon, E. B., Britton, N. F. & Sumpter, D. J. T. Information ﬂow, opinion
polling and collective intelligence in house-hunting social insects. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 357,
1567–1583 (2002).
6. Lindauer, M. Communication in swarm-bees searching for a new home. Nature 179, 63–66 (1957).
7. Seeley, T. D. Honeybee Ecology: a Study of Adaptation in Social Life 71–74 (Princeton Univ. Press,
Princeton, 1985).
8. Seeley, T. D. The Wisdom of the Hive 34–35 (Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1995).
9. Seeley, T. D. Consensus building during nest-site selection in honey bee swarms: the expiration of
dissent. Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 53, 417–424 (2003).
10. Conradt, L. & Roper, T. J. Group decision-making in animals. Nature 421, 155–158 (2003).
11. von Frisch, K. The Dance Language and Orientation of Bees 28–235 (Harvard Univ. Press, Harvard,
1967).
12. Rubenstein, D. I. & Hack, M. Horse signals: the sounds of scents and fury.Evol. Ecol.6, 254–260 (1992).
13. Partridge, B. L. Structure and function of ﬁsh schools. Sci. Am. 245, 114–123 (1982).
14. Berthold, P . & Querner, U. Genetic basis of migratory behaviour in European warblers. Science 212,
77–79 (1981).
15. Berthold, P ., Helbig, A. J., Mohr, G. & Querner, U. Rapid microevolution of migratory behaviour in a
wild bird species. Nature 360, 668–670 (1992).
16. Neill, W. H. Mechanisms of ﬁsh distribution in heterothermal environments. Am. Zool. 19, 305–317
(1979).
17. Grunbaum, D. Schooling as a strategy for taxis in a noisy environment.Evol. Ecol. 12, 503–522 (1998).
18. Couzin, I. D., Krause, J., James, R., Ruxton, G. D. & Franks, N. R. Collective memory and spatial
sorting in animal groups. J. Theor. Biol. 218, 1–11 (2002).
19. Hoare, D. J., Couzin, I. D., Godin, J.-G. & Krause, J. Context-dependent group-size choice in ﬁsh.
Anim. Behav. 67, 155–164 (2004).
20. Batschelet, E. Circular Statistics in Biology 34–36 (Academic, London, 1981).
21. Simons, A. M. Many wrongs: the advantage of group navigation.Trends Ecol. Evol.19, 453–455 (2004).
22. Grego´ ire, G., Chate´, H. & Tu, Y . Moving and staying together without a leader.Physica D 181, 157–170
(2003).
Supplementary Informationaccompanies the paper on www.nature.com/nature.
Acknowledgements I.D.C. thanks the Pew Charitable Trusts, the NSF and the EPSRC for their
support. I.D.C. and J.K. acknowledge an EPSRC grant and are also grateful for fellowships at the
Centre for Interdisciplinary Research, University of Bielefeld, where we had the opportunity to
develop this research. S.A.L. acknowledges support from the NSF and the Andrew W. Mellon
Foundation, and N.R.F. from the EPSRC and the BBSRC. I.D.C. thanks Balliol College for support
and S. Pratt, D. Rubenstein, D. James and A. Ward for their input.
Competing interests statementThe authors declare that they have no competing ﬁnancial
interests.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to I.D.C.
(iain.couzin@zoo.ox.ac.uk or icouzin@princeton.edu).
................... ....................... ....................
Insects breathe discontinuously
to avoid oxygen toxicity
Stefan K. Hetz1 & Timothy J. Bradley2
1Department of Animal Physiology, Humboldt-Universita¨t zu Berlin, Philippstr.
13, 10115 Berlin, Germany
2Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California,
Irvine, California 92697-2525, USA
.............................................................................................................................................................................
The respiratory organs of terrestrial insects consist of tracheal
tubes with external spiracular valves that control gas exchange.
Despite their relatively high metabolic rate, many insects have
highly discontinuous patterns of gas exchange, including long
periods when the spiracles are fully closed. T wo explanations
have previously been put forward to explain this behaviour: ﬁrst,
that this pattern serves to reduce respiratory water loss
1, and
second, that the pattern may have initially evolved in under-
ground insects as a way of dealing with hypoxic or hypercapnic
conditions
2. Here we propose a third possible explanation based
on the idea that oxygen is necessary for oxidative metabolism but
also acts as a toxic chemical that can cause oxidative damage of
tissues even at relatively low concentrations. At physiologically
normal partial pressures of CO
2, the rate of CO 2 diffusion out of
the insect respiratory system is slower than the rate of O 2 entry;
this leads to a build-up of intratracheal CO 2. The spiracles must
therefore be opened at intervals to rid the insect of accumulated
CO
2, a process that exposes the tissues to dangerously high levels
of O 2. W e suggest that the cyclical pattern of open and closed
spiracles observed in resting insects is a necessary consequence of
the need to rid the respiratory system of accumulated CO
2,
followed by the need to reduce oxygen toxicity.
The respiratory system of insects consists of a highly branched
system of cuticle-lined tubes extending throughout the body 3. The
tubules are ﬁlled with air, which greatly facilitates the transport of
gases through the body (the diffusion of O
2 and CO2 is about 10 6
and 10 4 times faster, respectively, in air than in water, blood or
tissue)4. The tracheae open to the external atmosphere through
valve-like spiracles on the surface of the abdomen and thorax.
Internal to the spiracles are large tracheal trunks and distensible
air sacs. Smaller tracheae extend from the tracheal trunks in a
branching, dendritic pattern. The ﬁnest branches at the tips of the
tracheal system, termed tracheoles, can be less than a micrometre in
diameter. They lie adjacent to the tissues and serve as the principal
site for gas exchange.
Early calculations suggested that passive diffusion of gases in the
tracheal system of insects should be more than adequate to support
oxidative metabolism, even in fairly large insects
4. Observation of
living insects reveals, however, that they have elaborate processes for
changing the hydrostatic pressure in the haemocoel, thereby actively
ventilating the tracheal system
5–7. Even more surprisingly, many
insects show highly rhythmic patterns of spiracular control (the
discontinuous gas exchange cycle, DGC) where the tracheal system
is periodically completely closed, followed by lengthy periods
during which respiratory exchange is severely constricted
8–10.I ti s
intriguing to insect physiologists that a system which can apparently
be operated passively instead exhibits a complex system of controls
that are both metabolically costly and would seem to interfere with,
rather than foster, respiratory homeostasis.
The discontinuous gas exchange cycle of insects is characterized
by a period in which the spiracles are fully closed (the ‘closed phase’ ,
Fig. 1). During this time, the partial pressure of oxygen (p
O2) in the
lumina of the tracheae declines, and the partial pressure of CO 2
(pCO2) increases. Owing to the high solubility of CO2 in the aqueous
haemolymph and a respiratory quotient (the amount of CO 2
letters to nature
NATURE | VOL 433 | 3 FEBRUARY 2005 | www.nature.com/nature516 ©  2005 Nature Publishing Group 
 