

===== PAGE 1 =====
APPLIED PHYSICAL
SCIENCES
ECOLOGY
Morphogenesis of termite mounds
Samuel A. Ockoa,1, Alexander Heydeb,1, and L. Mahadevanb,c,d,e,2
aDepartment of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; bDepartment of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138; cPaulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138; dDepartment of Physics, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA 02138; and eKavli Institute for Bionano Science and Technology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138
Edited by Simon A. Levin, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, and approved December 17, 2018 (received for review November 7, 2018)
Several species of millimetric-sized termites across Africa, Asia,
Australia, and South America collectively construct large, meter-
sized, porous mound structures that serve to regulate mound tem-
perature, humidity, and gas concentrations. These mounds display
varied yet distinctive morphologies that range widely in size and
shape. To explain this morphological diversity, we introduce a
mathematical model that couples environmental physics to insect
behavior: The advection and diffusion of heat and pheromones
through a porous medium are modiﬁed by the mound geometry
and, in turn, modify that geometry through a minimal charac-
terization of termite behavior. Our model captures the range of
naturally observed mound shapes in terms of a minimal set of
dimensionless parameters and makes testable hypotheses for the
response of mound morphology to external temperature oscilla-
tions and internal odors. Our approach also suggests mechanisms
by which evolutionary changes in odor production rate and con-
struction behavior coupled to simple physical laws can alter the
characteristic mound morphology of termites.
termite mound |animal architecture |niche construction |convection |
porous media
T
ermites are highly eusocial insects, and the large, often elab-
orate mounds of mound-building termite species protect the
colony and internal nest, while providing responsive control over
their microenvironment (1, 2). The complex, porous networks
that colonies construct within termite mounds help to regulate
gas ﬂow, pheromone dispersion, and humidity, which need to be
maintained for the specialized purposes of brooding and culti-
vating the fungal species on which they feed (3, 4). The sculpted
morphology of a termite mound is frequently characteristic of
the species or genus, being generally conserved within a given
species and geography, but strikingly variable across species and
environments (Fig. 1) (1). For example, the genus Amitermes
builds colossal wedge-shaped mounds with a primary axis ori-
ented north–south, a consistent directionality that gives them
the common name “compass termites,” allowing the internal
mound temperature to rapidly increase in the morning but avoid
overheating at midday (5). In contrast, the mounds of Cubiter-
mes are tall and narrow, while the mounds of Cornitermes are
small and compact (6). It is thought that these dramatically dif-
ferent mound sizes and shapes allow termites to adapt to their
particular environments, but there has been little in terms of
quantitative evidence to corroborate this.
Part of the reason for this may be that the physiological ram-
iﬁcations of termite mounds have only recently been clariﬁed.
Direct measurement of diurnal variations in ﬂow through the
mounds of Odontotermes obesus and Macrotermes michaelseni
shows that a simple combination of geometry, porosity, and
heterogeneous thermal mass allows mounds to use diurnal ther-
mal oscillations for another purpose: ventilation, to remove
humidity and carbon dioxide from the nest (7, 8). To ensure
successful ventilation in different environments, it is crucial
that termites construct their mounds in coordination with their
surrounding conditions. Even between colonies of the same
species, some termites can adapt the morphology of their mound
to ﬁt the local environment; Macrotermes bellicosus constructs
thin-walled, cathedral-shaped mounds in open savannas, for
example, but thick-walled, dome-shaped mounds in forested
areas (2).
Altogether, the impressive scale and adaptability of termite
mounds begs the question of the mechanism by which they are
created and maintained. In the absence of a centralized control
system or coordinating individual, these elaborate but conserved
mound morphologies result from the collective behavior of ter-
mites acting only on their perception of local conditions within
the mound (9). Mound morphogenesis is thus an extreme exem-
plar of self-organized animal architecture, where global-scale
collective patterns emerge from locally driven individual behav-
iors, termed “stigmergy” (10–12). Attempts to quantify these
processes typically focus on microscopic agent-based models that
simulate the behavior of a multitude of organisms computation-
ally (12–16). But since environmental factors, such as temper-
ature and humidity, and sensory stimuli, including pheromone
concentrations, vary over slow time scales but long length
scales, a natural question is that of an effective description on
these scales.
The precise biological mechanism by which termite construc-
tion behavior and mound morphology are coupled is not yet
fully understood, but a sizable literature of past work typi-
cally assumes the existence of some information-carrying ﬁeld
of odor particles, such as secreted pheromones or metabolic
gases. Proposed mechanisms can be roughly divided into two
broad categories: the secretion of a templating odor at the nest
that undergoes diffusion and advection globally throughout the
mound, and the local deposition of a building pheromone in
deposited soil pellets that promote further deposition nearby
(17–19). Templating can assist in the formation of large-scale
structures, and there exists some experimental evidence that
construction of the royal chamber is controlled by a pheromone
Signiﬁcance
Termite mounds are the result of the collective behavior of ter-
mites working to modify their physical environment, which in
turn affects their behavior. During mound construction, envi-
ronmental factors such as heat ﬂow and gas exchange affect
the building behavior of termites, and the resulting change in
mound geometry in turn modiﬁes the response of the inter-
nal mound environment to external thermal oscillations. Our
study highlights the principles of self-organized animal archi-
tecture driven by the coupling of environmental physics to
organismal behavior and might serve as a natural inspiration
for the design of sustainable human architectures.
Author contributions: S.A.O., A.H., and L.M. designed research, performed research,
analyzed data, and wrote the paper.y
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. y
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.y
Published under thePNAS license .y
1 S.A.O. and A.H. contributed equally to this work.y
2 To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: lmahadev@g.harvard.edu.y
This article contains supporting information online atwww.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1818759116/-/DCSupplemental.y
Published online February 11, 2019.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1818759116 PNAS | February 26, 2019 | vol. 116 | no. 9 | 3379–3384

===== PAGE 2 =====
Fig. 1. Variation in natural termite mound morphologies. Photographs
show a sample of termite mounds representative of those constructed by
ﬁve millimetric fungus-harvesting species, labeled at the bottom. Corniter-
mes cumulans and Cubitermes funifaber images courtesy of Christian Jost
(Centre de Biologie Int ´egrative, Toulouse, France). Apicotermes lamaniand
Procornitermes araujoiimages reprinted with permission from ref. 29.
ﬁeld emitted by the queen, such as chambers and overall mound
shape (20). At a similarly large scale, carbon dioxide gradi-
ents may be used as templates in nest construction (21). There
is, however, only scarce evidence that building pheromones
are relevant outside of their inﬂuence on the construction of
smaller-scale structures including pillars and walls (22).
Here, we present a model for termite mound morphogen-
esis that results only from the collective behavior of termites
acting on local information, yet generates distinctive morpholo-
gies resulting from the interplay of physical and behavioral
parameters. Our model allows us to explore the potential range
of mature mound morphology in terms of a limited number
of parameters and also yields simple scaling relationships for
mound size, shape, and construction time. Using numerical
simulations of the governing equations over a wide range of fea-
sible natural conditions, we follow the geometric variation in
mound shapes and see that they are consistent with our scal-
ing predictions as well as naturally observed variation in mound
morphology.
Mathematical Model of Mound Morphogenesis
Our fundamental premise is that the shape of a mound results
from the collective behavior of termites simultaneously acting
on and modifying locally changing information. We characterize
this process as a simple feedback loop of physical and behav-
ioral dynamics (Fig. 2), an elaboration of the qualitative theories
of past work (20, 23). An incipient developing mound struc-
ture determines the ﬂow of heat and air within the mound,
which are driven by external temperature oscillations. Internal
airﬂows then transport odor concentrations generated at the
mound nest throughout the mound interior (24). This odor ﬁeld
can represent secreted pheromones, metabolic gases such as
carbon dioxide, or any other information-carrying particle that
can undergo diffusion and advection within the mound. Ter-
mite workers adjust their construction behavior in response to
local odor concentration and modify the mound structure, com-
pleting the feedback loop. This system governs the dynamics of
mound morphogenesis until a mature mound size and shape are
obtained.
Within the mound environment, our model deﬁnes four dis-
joint subdomains, which are ( i) the mound interior, which is
macroporous; (ii) the ground, which consists of the space below
a speciﬁed ground level that is not part of the mound interior;
(iii) the surrounding air, which consists of the space above the
ground level that is not part of the mound interior or wall; and
(iv) the wall, the boundary between the interior and the air with
a ﬁxed thickness. In addition, we assume that the termite nest
is at ground level along the radial center of the mound inte-
rior; changing the depth of the nest simply rescales the vertical
dimension of the mound. For geometric and numerical sim-
plicity, we limit ourselves to the consideration of axisymmetric
mounds.
In these domains, we model the evolution of temperature, air-
ﬂow, and odor ﬁelds as ﬂuids in a porous medium (25). The
temperature in the mound T(r, t) varies due to thermal conduc-
tion and ﬂuid convection; heat diffuses within the mound interior
and wall with constant thermal diffusivity DT and is advected by
an airﬂow ﬁeld u(r, t) with an advection weight ν, according to
the advection–diffusion equation
∂T
∂t (r, t) =∇·
[
DT ∇T(r, t) −νu(r, t) ·T(r, t)
]
. [1]
The advection weight ν parameterizes the relative speed at
which heat follows the airﬂow within the mound, and of par-
ticular interest is the thermal conduction limit ν→0, in which
conduction dominates convection. At the interface between the
mound wall and air, the temperature ﬂuctuates according to a
driving diurnal oscillation set by the mound boundary with the
ambient air:
Fig. 2. Schematic of model procedures over a single iteration. ( A) The previous mound state is composed of disjoint mound regions. ( B) As the ambient
temperature oscillates over a 1-d cycle, the heat proﬁle and airﬂow ﬁeld are calculated in the mound interior. ( C) The odor proﬁle is computed, and the
mound wall shape is updated accordingly. Green or red cells indicate sites with an average odor level sufﬁciently above or below (respectively) the odor
threshold, resulting in termites extending the mound outward or allowing the wall to collapse inward. ( D) The mound shape is updated and used for the
next iteration. This process is repeated until convergence to a steady-state morphology.
3380 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1818759116 Ocko et al.

===== PAGE 3 =====
APPLIED PHYSICAL
SCIENCES
ECOLOGY
T(r, t) = ∆T sin(2πt/τ), [2]
where ∆T is the amplitude of thermal oscillation and τ is the
day length. We model the airﬂow ﬁeld u as being driven by heat
gradients, following Darcy’s law with a conserved ﬂuid,
u(r, t) = κ(r)
η [αρgT(r, t)ˆz −∇P(r, t)], ∇·u(r, t) = 0, [3]
where P(r, t) is ﬂuid pressure, κ(r) is permeability, ηis viscosity,
and αρg is the buoyancy parameter, with αthe thermal expan-
sion coefﬁcient. We take permeability to be a positive constant
κ0 in the mound interior, and zero in the wall and ground.
We model the odor concentration ﬁeld φ(r, t) in the mound
as the consequence of small particle diffusion and advection by
airﬂows, with odor production at rate J at the nest. For a central
nest at ground height, the odor dynamics follow
ϵ∂φ
∂t (r, t) =∇·
[
D(r)∇φ(r, t) −u(r, t) ·φ(r, t)
]
+ Jδ(r), [4]
where ϵ sets the time scale of the dynamics, D(r) is the odor
diffusivity, and δ(r) denotes the Dirac distribution representing
a point source of odor at the nest. We set the odor diffusivity to
a positive constant D0 in the mound interior and the wall and
zero in the ground. To impose boundary conditions, we require
that the odor concentration vanishes at the edge of the mound, so
that φ= 0outside of the mound. Under the assumption that odor
particles are small and highly diffuse, we consider the limit of
ϵ→0, so that at any point in time, the odor ﬁeld is a steady-state
solution to a rapid advection–diffusion process. This allows the
odor ﬁeld to respond immediately to modiﬁcations in the airﬂow
within the mound.
To update the mound morphology iteratively, we suppose that
in any local region of the mound wall with an odor concentra-
tion above the threshold φc, termite workers work to enlarge
the mound, extending outward the mound boundary. Similarly,
in any region along the wall with an odor concentration belowφc,
termites no longer maintain the area, and so the mound bound-
ary moves inward due to natural decay. We note that, in this
model, the effect of any localized building pheromone or local
stigmergic rule will modify the value of φc. This then represents
a general iterative strategy to solve for the steady-state mound
shape, which could also emerge from alternative update rules.
For model simplicity, we update the mound geometry only
along the boundary and do not model changes in internal struc-
ture. As a result, we do not impose conservation of building
material as a constraint, as the ﬂux of material between the
mound wall and mound interior or exterior is not known. At
each update, the below-ground portion of the mound interior
becomes a hemisphere having the same radius as the mound at
ground level. We assume that the characteristic time for mound
construction is long compared with the diurnal time scale; the
update frequency is taken to approximately represent a day,
while the full construction process can require a month to a year
before a steady-state morphology is achieved.
Eqs. 1–4 along with the behavioral rules described above com-
plete the prescription of our model and allow us to solve for
T(r, t), u(r, t), φ(r, t) over a diurnal period τ, and then update
these ﬁelds before iterating the process. The model has four
length scales: ( i) the wall thickness, h, which for most natu-
rally occurring mounds falls within a narrow range (SI Appendix,
Table S1); (ii) the thermal diffusion length, LT = √τDT , which
sets the penetration depth of the diurnal temperature oscilla-
tions; ( iii) the Peclet length of odor, L0 = D0η/(κ0αρg∆T),
which deﬁnes the length scale over which odor diffuses due to
buoyancy-driven ﬂow; and (iv) a characteristic mound radius,Rc,
deﬁned below.
By comparing the characteristic mound radius to the other
length scales, we obtain three dimensionless parameters: the
Peclet number (Pe = Rc/L0), the ratio of the characteristic
mound radius to the Peclet length of odor; the relative thick-
ness (Th = h/Rc), the ratio of wall thickness to the characteristic
mound radius; and the Biot number (Bi = LT /Rc), the ratio of
the thermal diffusion length to the characteristic mound radius,
which together deﬁne the morphogenetic processes deﬁning
steady-state mound shapes.
Although a rough estimate for the Peclet number Pe could
be obtained under the assumption of simple molecular diffu-
sion, we explore a wide range of values that give rise to a
variety of mound forms. We note that natural pheromones
yield typically low Prandtl numbers, and a further reduction
to the effective Prandtl number is due to thermal conduc-
tion through the mound material and internal air. To reﬂect
this, we consider the thermal conduction limit of small ν, such
that thermal Peclet length greatly exceeds the Peclet length
of odor.
Using the length scales for characteristic mound radius, ther-
mal diffusion length, and wall thickness as constrained by exper-
iments and natural observations, we ﬁnd that Peclet numbers
are in the range Pe ∈[10−6, 106], Biot numbers fall in the nar-
rower range Bi ∈[10−2, 1], and the relative thickness lies within
the range Th ∈[10−3, 10−1] (SI Appendix, Table S1 ). Varia-
tion between natural populations in any of these dimensionless
parameters can explain large disparities in mound size and shape
observed in nature.
Scaling of Mound Size, Shape, and Construction Time
The natural scaling relationships in our model formulation
lead to simple predictions for the size, shape, and construc-
tion time of a mature mound. The surface area of the mound
at steady state, for example, must be precisely large enough
to balance J, the volumetric ﬂux of odor generation inside
the mound, with the rate at which odor diffuses out through
the mound walls. This outward rate is the product of the total
amount of odor within the mound wall Φ, and the charac-
teristic speed at which this odor escapes through the wall is
D0/h. The amount of odor at the mound wall is proportional
to Φ ∼R2φc, since the surface area scales as the squared mound
radius R2 and the average odor concentration at the wall must
be precisely φc, the odor threshold, if steady state is achieved.
Hence, we have the relationship J = R2φcD0/h. Therefore, the
mature mound radius at steady-state Rc, i.e., the characteris-
tic mound radius used in our deﬁnition of the dimensionless
parameters, is
Rc ∼
√
Jh
D0φc
. [5]
When the Peclet number is small such that the mature mound
approximates a hemisphere, the mature surface area is simply
proportional to R2
c , and so the construction time until the mound
converges to its mature size scales as R2
c /DT . This represents
the time at which the thermal diffusion length LT matches the
steady-state mound radius. Hence, the dimensionless construc-
tion time tc follows the scaling law
tc ∼ R2
c
DT τ ∼Bi−2. [6]
A similar scaling prediction can be generated for the mound
aspect ratio H /R, the ratio of height H , and radius R of the
mound at steady state. This aspect ratio is determined primar-
ily by the convection of odor by vertical air currents, quantiﬁed
by the Peclet number Pe. An estimate can be obtained by a per-
turbation approach ( SI Appendix). The resulting scaling law is
Ocko et al. PNAS | February 26, 2019 | vol. 116 | no. 9 | 3381

===== PAGE 4 =====
simple: When Pe= 0, diffusion entirely dominates advection, giv-
ing rise to a hemispherical mound with a 1:1 aspect ratio, and any
deviation in the aspect ratio from perfect sphericity then scales
as the squared Peclet number:
H
R ∼1 +Pe2, [7]
where the constant of proportionality depends on the other
parameters in the model—namely, the Biot number Bi and the
relative thickness Th. Hence, the mature mound shape responds
quadratically to modiﬁcation of the Peclet number, as this affects
the degree to which air currents transport odor vertically in the
mound and promote mound construction and maintenance far
above the nest.
In combination, these three simple scaling laws predict a rela-
tionship between size, shape, and construction time of natural
mounds. Smaller mounds of low Rc, such as those built by ter-
mites of the Cornitermes genus, will tend to have smaller Peclet
numbers and, hence, a more spherical shape, as well as larger
Biot numbers and, hence, a shorter construction time. In con-
trast, the large, meter-sized mounds of high Rc built by some
termite species including O. obesus will tend to be more elon-
gated and will require longer construction time, assuming similar
values for h, LT , and L0. In this way, the size, shape, and con-
struction time of natural mounds can be related by the physical
parameters that govern the process of mound morphogenesis.
Numerical Simulations of Mound Morphospace
To go beyond the approximate scaling laws for the mature
mound radius, surface area, construction time, and aspect ratio
derived in the previous section, we now turn to numerical simula-
tions of model Eqs. 1–4 solved by using a ﬁnite difference model
in Matlab. We conducted 500 independent simulations of mound
morphogenesis across a wide volume of parameter space repre-
sentative of the range of feasible natural conditions under which
our model can operate, with typical values used to determine the
center of each range ( SI Appendix, Table S1 ). Each simulation
was initialized with a nest encased in a spherical mound wall of
ﬁxed thickness and run until a stable steady-state morphology
was obtained, and the dynamic size and shape of each mound
was tracked over time (Fig. 3 andMovie S1 ). Because our model
has no cylindrically asymmetric effects, all simulated mounds
must preserve their cylindrical symmetry over time, so we inte-
grate the morphogenesis model by discretizing in cylindrical
coordinates.
While sweeping through each of the full range of dimension-
less parameter values assumed in our model formulation, we
measured mound size and shape after convergence to a steady-
state morphology, which occurred between 5 and 500 iterations
after initialization. Using mound volume as a measurement of
mound size, and using aspect ratio and mound sphericity (the
ratio of the surface area of a sphere to the surface area of the
mound, proportionally scaled to range between 0 and 1) as mea-
surements of mound shape, we tested for relationships between
mound morphology and the three dimensionless parameters that
control the system.
Within the large volume of searched feasible parameter space
(Fig. 4), our simulations found that mounds with low relative
thickness and low Biot number tend to grow to larger vol-
umes. Indeed, by deﬁnition, these two dimensionless quantities
should be relatively small when the critical mound radius is
large. Moreover, we found that mound sphericity was strongly
promoted by low Peclet number, while high Peclet numbers
resulted in more unusual, aspherical mound shapes. This con-
ﬁrms our intuition that systems with high Peclet numbers,
where convective currents dominate conduction, can grow in
a focused direction due to the airﬂow transporting the odor
in the direction of growth. The nonlinear and nonmonotonic
nature of these associations was evident both in parameter space
and when steady-state mound shapes were plotted on size–
shape axes that deﬁne a mound morphospace ( SI Appendix, Fig.
S2). However, despite the simplicity of our model, there exists
no simple relationship between mound size and Peclet num-
ber, nor does mound shape appear to be strongly affected by
either relative thickness or Biot number within the parameter
range tested.
We found that the simulated mound morphologies conformed
well to our simple scaling predictions across the full range of
plausible model parameters (Fig. 5).
Discussion: Physics, Behavior, and Architecture
Termite mounds are one of the most remarkable examples of
self-organized animal architectures, and the range of shapes and
sizes that they exhibit have excited the imagination of scientists
for a long time (9). To explain these morphologies, we provide
a simple, coarse-grained theory that couples the physics of heat
and mass transport to termite building behavior. The resulting
morphology then feeds back on the transport processes until a
dynamic steady state is achieved. This two-way coupling between
termite behavior and local temperature and airﬂow sufﬁces to
generate a variety of mound geometries as three dimensionless
Fig. 3. Morphogenesis dynamics of simulated mounds. (A) Various steady-state mound morphologies are plotted in a 2D morphospace of mound sphericity
and log10 volume, relative to the critical mound radius. Points are colored and sized by the Bi and Th values used in the simulation. The two black trajectories
show two possible paths through this morphospace, from an initially small and spherical mound to the mature shape. ( B and C) Progression of mound
geometries during morphogenesis. Each row corresponds to a single mound as it progresses along the corresponding trajectory in A. Parameters were set
to Bi = 10−2, Th = 10−2, and Pe = 4 ×104 (B) or Pe = 2 ×102 (C).
3382 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1818759116 Ocko et al.

===== PAGE 5 =====
APPLIED PHYSICAL
SCIENCES
ECOLOGY
Fig. 4. Mapping model parameters to mature mound morphologies. ( A) An array of nine simulated mound shapes for varying relative thickness Th and
Peclet number Pe, for ﬁxed Biot number Bi = 0.05. (B) Three simulated mound shapes for varying Bi for ﬁxed Th = 0.05 and Pe = 200. (C) Dimensionless
parameter space of our morphogenesis model. Each dot corresponds to a single simulation, with dot position giving the values of Pe, Th, and Bi from the
simulation, dot size proportional to the mound volume at steady state, and dot color corresponding to mound sphericity at steady state according to the
color bar. Axes represent base-10 logarithms of the dimensionless model parameters.
parameters characterizing the geometry and dynamics of heat
and ﬂuid transport are varied.
In the absence of any existing ﬁeld experiments to compare
with, we ask whether the variability of mound morphologies as
a function of species and climates around the world is qual-
itatively consistent with our model. The growth of mounds is
dominated by building processes at the surface and limited by
molecular diffusion of pheromones through the mound wall.
As a mound grows, unless more termites are recruited into the
building process, the volumetric density of termites decreases
over time. Nevertheless, larger termite colonies should build
larger mounds, as has been observed within and across many ter-
mite taxa, including Nasutitermes, Macrotermes, and much of the
Termitinae subfamily (26). Our model agree with this intuitive
relationship, as larger colonies will tend to produce a greater
quantity of odor, and this high rateJ will result in a large mound
radius Rc.
Moreover, our model agrees with the simple intuition that
larger mounds will take longer to construct, and, as a result,
the distribution of mounds in an area may be more sparse than
smaller mounds, which can be constructed quickly and may be
quite dense. This relationship aligns with the observation that
large Macrotermes mounds have a low density of 1–4 ha −1 (27),
while small Cubitermes mounds have a substantially higher den-
sity of 385–496 ha −1 (28). Our results also show that, cetus
paribus, the absolute size of termite mounds increases with the
amplitude of temperature oscillations. Consistent with this, the
mounds of the genus M. michaelseni found in the open grass-
lands of southern Africa are much taller than those of the genus
O. obesus from the subtropical grasslands and forests of south
Fig. 5. Correspondence between analytical scaling predictions and simulated mature mound morphologies. ( A) Simulated mound radii are well predicted
by the critical mound radius Rc as deﬁned in the main text. ( B) Mound surface area grows approximately in proportion to the square of Rc. (C) The mound
aspect ratio H/R scales as 1 + Pe2, where Pe is the Peclet number. (D) The construction time tc until the mound achieves its mature size scales approximately
as the inverse-squared Biot number Bi. All axes have been scaled by the appropriate proportionality factors, and all points are colored according to the
base-10 logarithm of the Biot number (Bi).
Ocko et al. PNAS | February 26, 2019 | vol. 116 | no. 9 | 3383

===== PAGE 6 =====
Asia, as the scale of diurnal temperature oscillations in covered
forests are mitigated by the shade (8). In our proposed modeling
framework, it is these diurnal thermal oscillations that provide
the external ﬂuctuations that drive the mound-construction pro-
cess, as opposed to external pressure gradient or wind ﬂow. This
choice was informed by previous studies on the external condi-
tions that induce interior transient ﬂows in the termite mounds
of O. obesus(7) and M. michaelseni(8). In the mounds of both
species, external wind was found to play a subordinate role rel-
ative to the dominant thermal mechanism considered by our
model in this work.
The modeling framework presented here suggests several
possible extensions, each at the expense of model simplicity. Cur-
rently, our model does not address changes in mound shape
associated with mechanical forces and mound settling under the
inﬂuence of gravity, a process that is likely important during the
early stages of mound building. Furthermore, the current model
averages over the complex internal structure of the mound,
clearly seen in excavated nests and captured in agent-based
simulations (16, 29). These labyrinthine structures change the
detailed mechanics of heat and mass transport while also making
these processes heterogeneous, effects that will lead to ﬂuctua-
tions in the shape and stability of the mound. The construction
of these internal nest structures in social insects has already seen
modeling interest (17–19). Instead, by averaging over these com-
plex internal structures, our continuum model serves to provide
a global picture of the generation of the overall mound form.
Our coarse-grained macroscopic model could serve as the
outer problem that drives and is driven by the microscale pro-
cesses at the level of individual agents. For example, we have
neglected here the effects of active transport of water by ter-
mites within the mound and the passive dynamics of evaporative
cooling that will change the temperature proﬁles and thereby
the mechanics of odor transport. Moreover, our threshold-based
update rule gives rise to one possible set of dynamics leading
to an equilibrium mound form, and it serves to roughly capture
the idea that termite workers respond to the odor in a sensi-
tive manner by shaping their environment. The incorporation
of more nuanced individual behaviors or other nonthresholded
update rules, including a linear relationship between local odor
concentration and worker activity, could result in altered dynam-
ics, although the properties of our system would nonetheless lead
the mound to converge upon the same equilibrium morphology.
Finally, the radially symmetric formulation of our morpho-
genesis model adequately captures the largely symmetric shapes
of natural mounds, but clearly neglects a few potential sources
of asymmetry. We assume that the termite nest is approxi-
mately positioned along the central mound axis at ground level,
although asymmetric or subterranean nests can alter the odor
dynamics and lead to different, radially asymmetric steady-state
mound shapes. Consistent bias in directed sunlight may also be a
source of radial asymmetry, yielding effects such as the north-
ward tilt seen in mounds of M. michaelseni in the Southern
Hemisphere (30). Likewise, ﬂuctuations in the direction of sun-
light may lead to cyclic asymmetric growth on the time scales of
days and years, which may be particularly relevant to understand-
ing mound morphogenesis far from the Equator [for example, in
Australian compass termites (5)].
Generalizing our model to account for these additional effects
is certainly within the realm of possibility and would be impor-
tant to address the ecological and evolutionary aspects of mound
morphogenesis. Furthermore, understanding similar principles
underlying the construction of animal architectures such as ant
nests and beehives are natural next steps, as are quantitative
predictions of our theory in speciﬁc contexts such as mound
repair and maintenance. More broadly, our theory demonstrates
how an organism capable of building behavior can respond to
its macroenvironment by changing its microenvironment, via a
feedback process leading to a nonequilibrium steady state that
is adaptable and robust by virtue of this feedback loop. This
is clearly not limited to social insect architecture. Indeed, we
humans do it all of the time; as W. Churchill pointed out a long
time ago, “We shape our buildings; thereafter they shape us.”
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank H. King for helpful discussions. Partial
support was provided by NSF Graduate Fellowship DGE 1144152 (to A.H);
the Human Frontiers Science Program under Grant RGP0066/2012-TURNER
(to S.A.O. and L.M.); the Henry W. Kendall Physics Fellowship (S.A.O.);
the Karel Urbanek Applied Physics Fellowship (S.A.O.); the MacArthur
Foundation (L.M.); and NSF Physics of Living Systems Grant PHY1606895
(to L.M.).
1.Korb J (2001) Termite mound architecture, from function to construction. Biology of
Termites: A Modern Synthesis, eds Bignell DE, Roisin Y, Lo N (Springer, Dordrecht, The
Netherlands), pp 349–373.
2.Korb J (2007) Termites. Curr Biol17:R995–R999.
3.Heinrich B (1981) Insect Thermoregulation(Wiley-Interscience, New York).
4.Korb J (2003) Thermoregulation and ventilation of termite mounds. Naturwis-
senschaften 90:212–219.
5.Jacklyn PM (1992) “Magnetic” termite mound surfaces are oriented to suit wind and
shade conditions. Oecologia 91:385–395.
6.Cosarinsky MI (2011) The nest growth of the neotropical mound-building termite,
Cornitermes cumulans: A micromorphological analysis. J Insect Sci11:122.
7.King H, Ocko S, Mahadevan L (2015) Termite mounds harness diurnal temperature
oscillations for ventilation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA112:11589–11593.
8.Ocko SA, et al. (2017) Solar-powered ventilation of African termite mounds. J Exp Biol
220:3260–3269.
9.Hansell M (2005) Animal Architecture(Oxford Univ Press, Oxford).
10.Grass ´e P-P (1959) Reconstruction of the nest and coordination between individuals
in terms. Bellicositermes natalensisand cubitermes sp. the theory of stigmergy: Test
interpretation of termite constructions. Soc Insect6:41–80.
11.Theraulaz G, Bonabeau E (1999) A brief history of stigmergy. Artif Life 5:97–
116.
12.Camazine S, et al. (2001) Self-Organization in Biological Systems(Princeton Univ Press,
Princeton).
13.Theraulaz G, Bonabeau E (1995) Coordination in distributed building. Science
269:686–688.
14.Bonabeau E (1997) From classical models of morphogenesis to agent-based models of
pattern formation. Artif Life3:191–211.
15.Courtois PJ, Heymans F (1991) A simulation of the construction process of a termite
nest. J Theor Biol153:469–475.
16.Khuong A, et al. (2016) Stigmergic construction and topochemical information shape
ant nest architecture. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA113:1303–1308.
17.Deneubourg JL (1977) Application de l’ordre par ﬂuctuations `a la description de
certaines ´etapes de la construction du nid chez les termites. Insect Soc24:117–130.
18.Bonabeau E, et al. (1988) A model for the emergence of pillars, walls and royal
chambers in termite nests. Phil Trans R Soc B353:1561–1576.
19.Franks NR, Deneubourg JL (1997) Self-organizing nest construction in ants: Individual
worker behaviour and the nest’s dynamics.Anim Behav54:779–796.
20.Bruinsma OH (1979) An analysis of building behaviour of the termite Macroter-
mes subhyalinus (Rambur). PhD dissertation (Wageningen University and Research,
Wageningen, The Netherlands).
21.Cox MD, Blanchard GB (1977) Gaseous templates in ant nests. J Theor Biol204:223–
238.
22.Fouquet D, Costa-Leonardo AM, Fournier R, Blanco S, Jost C (1977) Coordination of
construction behavior in the termite Procornitermes araujoi: Structure is a stronger
stimulus than volatile marking. Insect Soc61:253–264.
23.Howse PE (1966) Air movement and termite behaviour. Nature 210:967–968.
24.Darlington J, Zimmerman P, Greenberg J, Westberg C, Bakwin P (1997) Production of
metabolic gases by nests of the termite Macrotermes jeanneli in Kenya. J Trop Ecol
13:491–510.
25.Bear J (2013) Dynamics of Fluids in Porous Media (Courier Corporation, North
Chelmsford, MA).
26.Josens G, Soki K (2010) Relation between termite numbers and the size of their
mounds. Insect Soc57:303–316.
27.Pomero DE (1977) The distribution and abundance of large termite mounds in
Uganda. J Appl Ecol14:465–475.
28.Ferrar P (1982) Termites of a South African savanna. II. Densities and populations of
smaller mounds, and seasonality of breeding. Oecologia 52:133–138.
29.Perna A, Theraulaz G (2017) When social behaviour is moulded in clay: On growth
and form of social insect nests. J Exp Biol220:83–91.
30.Turner JS (2000) Architecture and morphogenesis in the mound of Macrotermes
michaelseni (Sj ¨ostedt) (Isoptera: Termitidae, Macrotermitinae) in northern Namibia.
Cimbebasia 16:143–175.
3384 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1818759116 Ocko et al.